.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project — All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt __OS_TIME 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm __os_clock_mono ,
.Nm __os_clock_real ,
.Nm __os_sleep_ns
.Nd monotonic and wall clocks; nanosecond sleep
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In os_time.h
.Ft int
.Fn __os_clock_mono "int64_t *out_ns"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_clock_real "int64_t *out_ns"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_sleep_ns "int64_t ns"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Fn __os_clock_mono
returns a non-negative monotonic clock reading in nanoseconds.
The epoch is platform-defined; only deltas are meaningful.
Successive calls never return a value that decreases.
.Pp
.Fn __os_clock_real
returns the wall-clock time in nanoseconds since the Unix epoch.
.Pp
.Fn __os_sleep_ns
sleeps for at least
.Fa ns
nanoseconds.
The actual sleep duration may exceed
.Fa ns
by an amount bounded by the scheduler's granularity.
A negative
.Fa ns
returns
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL
without sleeping.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Dv XTC_OK
on success;
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL
on a NULL output pointer;
.Dv XTC_E_RANGE
if the underlying time would overflow
.Vt int64_t
nanoseconds;
.Dv XTC_E_INTERNAL
on platform failure.
.Sh CONSTANTS
.Bl -tag -width XTC_NS_PER_SEC -compact
.It Dv XTC_NS_PER_SEC
1000000000.
.It Dv XTC_NS_PER_MS
1000000.
.It Dv XTC_NS_PER_US
1000.
.El
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
All functions are safe to call concurrently from any thread.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
int64_t before, after;
__os_clock_mono(&before);
__os_sleep_ns(5 * XTC_NS_PER_MS);   /* sleep 5 ms */
__os_clock_mono(&after);
printf("slept %lld ns\en", (long long)(after - before));
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr __os_atomic 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
First appeared in xtc 0.0.1 (M1).
