.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project — All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt __OS_MUTEX 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm __os_mutex_init ,
.Nm __os_mutex_destroy ,
.Nm __os_mutex_lock ,
.Nm __os_mutex_trylock ,
.Nm __os_mutex_unlock ,
.Nm __os_rwlock_init ,
.Nm __os_rwlock_destroy ,
.Nm __os_rwlock_rdlock ,
.Nm __os_rwlock_wrlock ,
.Nm __os_rwlock_unlock ,
.Nm __os_cond_init ,
.Nm __os_cond_destroy ,
.Nm __os_cond_wait ,
.Nm __os_cond_signal ,
.Nm __os_cond_broadcast ,
.Nm __os_sem_init ,
.Nm __os_sem_destroy ,
.Nm __os_sem_post ,
.Nm __os_sem_wait ,
.Nm __os_sem_trywait
.Nd portable mutexes, rwlocks, condition variables, and semaphores
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In os_thread.h
.Pp
.Ft int
.Fn __os_mutex_init "__os_mutex_t *m"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_mutex_destroy "__os_mutex_t *m"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_mutex_lock "__os_mutex_t *m"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_mutex_trylock "__os_mutex_t *m"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_mutex_unlock "__os_mutex_t *m"
.Pp
.Ft int
.Fn __os_rwlock_init "__os_rwlock_t *r"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_rwlock_destroy "__os_rwlock_t *r"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_rwlock_rdlock "__os_rwlock_t *r"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_rwlock_wrlock "__os_rwlock_t *r"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_rwlock_unlock "__os_rwlock_t *r"
.Pp
.Ft int
.Fn __os_cond_init "__os_cond_t *c"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_cond_destroy "__os_cond_t *c"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_cond_wait "__os_cond_t *c" "__os_mutex_t *m"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_cond_signal "__os_cond_t *c"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_cond_broadcast "__os_cond_t *c"
.Pp
.Ft int
.Fn __os_sem_init "__os_sem_t *s" "unsigned initial"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_sem_destroy "__os_sem_t *s"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_sem_post "__os_sem_t *s"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_sem_wait "__os_sem_t *s"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_sem_trywait "__os_sem_t *s"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm __os_mutex_* ,
.Nm __os_rwlock_* ,
.Nm __os_cond_* ,
and
.Nm __os_sem_*
families are the BDB-style portable wrappers around pthread mutexes,
rwlocks, condition variables, and POSIX semaphores.
.Pp
The handle types
.Vt __os_mutex_t , Vt __os_rwlock_t , Vt __os_cond_t ,
and
.Vt __os_sem_t
contain inline storage sized to comfortably hold the platform's
underlying type, so no separate allocation is required at init time.
.Pp
.Fn __os_mutex_trylock
returns
.Dv XTC_E_AGAIN
when the mutex is already held by another thread; the same convention
applies to
.Fn __os_sem_trywait .
.Pp
.Fn __os_cond_wait
must be called with
.Fa m
held; on return
.Fa m
is held again.
Spurious wakeups are possible per the underlying pthread contract;
callers must re-check the predicate in a
.Sy while
loop.
.Pp
.Fn __os_sem_*
implements an unnamed in-process semaphore.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Dv XTC_OK
on success;
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL
on a NULL handle;
.Dv XTC_E_AGAIN
when a try-style lock is already held;
.Dv XTC_E_INTERNAL
on platform failure.
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
All operations are safe to call from any thread.
A handle must be initialised before use and destroyed after the last
operation completes.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr __os_atomic 3 ,
.Xr __os_thread 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
First appeared in xtc 0.0.1 (M1).
