.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project — All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the PostgreSQL License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt __OS_THREAD 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm __os_thread_create ,
.Nm __os_thread_join ,
.Nm __os_thread_detach ,
.Nm __os_thread_self ,
.Nm __os_thread_yield ,
.Nm __os_thread_setname
.Nd OS-thread primitives
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In os_thread.h
.Ft int
.Fn __os_thread_create "__os_thread_t *thr" "__os_thread_fn fn" "void *arg"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_thread_join "__os_thread_t *thr" "void **retval"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_thread_detach "__os_thread_t *thr"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_thread_self "__os_thread_t *out"
.Ft void
.Fn __os_thread_yield "void"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_thread_setname "const char *name"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm __os_thread_*
family wraps the platform thread API
.Pq pthreads on Unix; Win32 on Windows
in xtc's
.Vt int -returning
out-parameter convention.
.Pp
.Fn __os_thread_create
spawns a new thread that calls
.Fa "fn" Ns Pq arg .
The handle is written to
.Fa *thr
and is valid until
.Fn __os_thread_join
or
.Fn __os_thread_detach
is called.
.Pp
.Fn __os_thread_join
blocks until the thread completes and recovers the value returned by
.Fa fn
into
.Fa *retval
.Po skipped if Fa retval No is Dv NULL Pc .
After a successful join the handle is invalidated.
.Pp
.Fn __os_thread_detach
releases the handle without waiting; the thread runs to completion
independently.
.Pp
.Fn __os_thread_self
returns a handle representing the calling thread.
The caller is responsible for releasing the underlying state via
.Xr __os_alloc 3
.Po currently a Fn __os_free No on Va out->opaque Pc .
This is a slightly-leaky API today and is scheduled to be replaced by
a value-typed handle in M1.5.
.Pp
.Fn __os_thread_yield
hints to the scheduler.
It is always safe and always returns.
.Pp
.Fn __os_thread_setname
labels the calling thread for debuggers and
.Xr ps 1 .
The implementation is best-effort; some platforms truncate to 15
characters, others ignore the call entirely.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Dv XTC_OK
on success;
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL
on a bad argument;
.Dv XTC_E_INTERNAL
when the underlying platform call fails.
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
All functions are safe to call from any thread.
A given
.Vt __os_thread_t
handle must be acted on by exactly one thread at a time.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr __os_mutex 3 ,
.Xr __os_atomic 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
First appeared in xtc 0.0.1 (M1).
