.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project — All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt __OS_ALLOC 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm __os_malloc ,
.Nm __os_calloc ,
.Nm __os_realloc ,
.Nm __os_free ,
.Nm __os_strdup ,
.Nm __os_aligned_alloc ,
.Nm __os_alloc_set_hook ,
.Nm __os_alloc_get_hook
.Nd hookable allocator
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In os_alloc.h
.Ft int
.Fn __os_malloc "size_t sz" "void **out"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_calloc "size_t n" "size_t sz" "void **out"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_realloc "void *p" "size_t sz" "void **out"
.Ft void
.Fn __os_free "void *p"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_strdup "const char *s" "char **out"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_aligned_alloc "size_t align" "size_t sz" "void **out"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_alloc_set_hook "const struct __os_alloc_hook *hook"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_alloc_get_hook "struct __os_alloc_hook *out"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm __os_*
allocators are the BDB-style envelope around the platform allocator.
Every function returns
.Dv XTC_OK
on success and a negative
.Dv XTC_E_*
on failure;
.Fn __os_free
has no failure mode.
.Pp
.Fn __os_malloc
allocates at least
.Fa sz
bytes and writes the pointer to
.Fa *out .
A request for zero bytes is permitted and is allowed to return
.Dv NULL ;
the result is in any case safe to pass to
.Fn __os_free .
On out of memory returns
.Dv XTC_E_NOMEM .
A
.Dv NULL
.Fa out
returns
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL .
.Pp
.Fn __os_calloc
allocates and zeros
.Fa n No \(mu Fa sz
bytes.
If the multiplication would overflow
.Vt size_t ,
returns
.Dv XTC_E_RANGE
without allocating.
.Pp
.Fn __os_realloc
behaves like
.Fn __os_malloc
when
.Fa p
is
.Dv NULL .
Otherwise it preserves the first
.Em min(oldsz, newsz)
bytes of the input.
.Pp
.Fn __os_free
accepts
.Dv NULL
as a no-op.
.Pp
.Fn __os_strdup
duplicates a NUL-terminated string.
A
.Dv NULL
input returns
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL .
.Pp
.Fn __os_aligned_alloc
requires
.Fa align
to be a power of two and at least
.Fn sizeof "void *" ;
otherwise returns
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL .
On success
.Po Va (uintptr_t)*out Pc Em % Fa align
is zero.
.Pp
.Fn __os_alloc_set_hook
swaps the allocator backend.
The hook structure has five callbacks
.Po Sy malloc , calloc , realloc , free , aligned Pc ,
all of which must be non-NULL or the call returns
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL .
.Pp
.Fn __os_alloc_get_hook
copies the active hook into
.Fa *out .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
On success,
.Dv XTC_OK
.Pq 0 .
On error, a negative
.Dv XTC_E_*
code; the output parameter is unmodified.
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
All operations are safe to call from any thread.
.Fn __os_alloc_set_hook
is intended to be called once at process startup; concurrent swaps
during live allocation are technically safe but ill-advised.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
void *p = NULL;
if (__os_malloc(64, &p) != XTC_OK) abort();
memset(p, 0, 64);
__os_free(p);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr __os_atomic 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
First appeared in xtc 0.0.1 (M1).
