.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt __OS_TLS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm __os_tls_create ,
.Nm __os_tls_destroy ,
.Nm __os_tls_set ,
.Nm __os_tls_get
.Nd thread-local storage keys
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In os_thread.h
.Ft int
.Fn __os_tls_create "__os_tls_key_t *key" "__os_tls_dtor dtor"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_tls_destroy "__os_tls_key_t key"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_tls_set "__os_tls_key_t key" "void *value"
.Ft "void *"
.Fn __os_tls_get "__os_tls_key_t key"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
TLS keys created by
.Fn __os_tls_create
provide thread-local storage for an arbitrary
.Vt "void *" .
Each thread sees its own value for a given key; threads that have
never called
.Fn __os_tls_set
on a key observe a
.Dv NULL
value.
.Pp
If
.Fa dtor
is non-NULL, it is invoked at thread exit for every thread that has
set a non-NULL value, with that value as the argument.
The destructor is not invoked at
.Fn __os_tls_destroy ;
it runs only at thread exit.
.Pp
.Fn __os_tls_get
returns the current thread's value
.Po
.Dv NULL
if never set
.Pc .
.Pp
.Fn __os_tls_destroy
releases the key.
After destruction the key must not be used.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Dv XTC_OK
on success;
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL
on a NULL key pointer;
.Dv XTC_E_INTERNAL
on platform failure.
.Pp
.Fn __os_tls_get
returns the value or
.Dv NULL ;
the function has no error indication besides
.Dv NULL .
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
A key created on one thread may be used by every thread.
The value-set / value-get pair is per-thread.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr __os_thread 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
First appeared in xtc 0.0.1 (M1).
