.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt __OS_ATOMIC 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm __os_atomic_load ,
.Nm __os_atomic_store ,
.Nm __os_atomic_cas ,
.Nm __os_atomic_fetch_add ,
.Nm __os_atomic_fence ,
.Nm __os_pause
.Nd inline atomic primitives
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In os_atomic.h
.Pp
For each integer width
.Em SUF
in
.Brq Sy i32 , Sy i64 , Sy u32 , Sy u64
and a corresponding C type
.Em T :
.Pp
.Ft T
.Fn __os_atomic_load_ Ns Em SUF "const T *p"
.Ft void
.Fn __os_atomic_store_ Ns Em SUF "T *p" "T v"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_atomic_cas_ Ns Em SUF "T *p" "T *expect" "T desired"
.Ft T
.Fn __os_atomic_fetch_add_ Ns Em SUF "T *p" "T delta"
.Pp
Pointer variants:
.Ft "void *"
.Fn __os_atomic_load_ptr "void *const *p"
.Ft void
.Fn __os_atomic_store_ptr "void **p" "void *v"
.Ft int
.Fn __os_atomic_cas_ptr "void **p" "void **expect" "void *desired"
.Pp
.Ft void
.Fn __os_atomic_fence "void"
.Ft void
.Fn __os_pause "void"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The
.Nm __os_atomic_*
family provides sequentially-consistent atomic primitives over the
five core integer widths and over pointers.
The library deliberately does not expose relaxed orderings in M1; if
weaker orderings are required they are added in a later milestone
under a distinct namespace.
.Pp
.Fn __os_atomic_load_ Ns Em SUF
returns the current value of
.Fa *p .
.Pp
.Fn __os_atomic_store_ Ns Em SUF
stores
.Fa v
into
.Fa *p .
.Pp
.Fn __os_atomic_cas_ Ns Em SUF
performs a strong compare-and-swap.
On success it returns 1 and writes
.Fa desired
into
.Fa *p .
On failure it returns 0 and overwrites
.Fa *expect
with the actual current value of
.Fa *p
so the caller can retry without an extra load.
.Pp
.Fn __os_atomic_fetch_add_ Ns Em SUF
atomically adds
.Fa delta
to
.Fa *p
and returns the previous value.
.Pp
.Fn __os_atomic_fence
issues a sequentially-consistent fence.
.Pp
.Fn __os_pause
is a CPU spin hint
.Pq Em pause No on x86, Em yield No on aarch64 .
It is not a yield to the scheduler.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
The CAS variants return 1 on success, 0 on failure.
Other functions return the value of the operation as documented.
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
All operations are safe to call concurrently from any thread.
The seq-cst memory order means a store on one thread is immediately
visible to a load on every other thread.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
int64_t counter = 0;
(void)__os_atomic_fetch_add_i64(&counter, 1);

int32_t v = 100, expect = 100;
if (__os_atomic_cas_i32(&v, &expect, 200)) {
        /* succeeded; v is now 200 */
} else {
        /* expect now holds the actual value */
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr __os_mutex 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
First appeared in xtc 0.0.1 (M1).
