.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt XTC_ASYNC 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_async ,
.Nm xtc_await ,
.Nm xtc_yield ,
.Nm xtc_stack_size ,
.Nm xtc_set_stack_size ,
.Nm XTC_COOP_REGION ,
.Nm XTC_PT_THREAD ,
.Nm XTC_PT_BEGIN ,
.Nm XTC_PT_END ,
.Nm XTC_PT_YIELD ,
.Nm XTC_PT_WAIT_UNTIL
.Nd L2 stackful coroutines and protothreads
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc_async.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_async "xtc_loop_t *loop" "xtc_coro_fn fn" "void *arg" "xtc_task_t **out_task"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_await "xtc_task_t *t" "intptr_t *result"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_yield "void"
.Ft size_t
.Fn xtc_stack_size "void"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_set_stack_size "size_t bytes"
.Pp
Macros:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
XTC_COOP_REGION { ... }

XTC_PT_THREAD(name(args)) { XTC_PT_BEGIN(pt); ...; XTC_PT_END(pt); }
XTC_PT_YIELD(pt)
XTC_PT_WAIT_UNTIL(pt, condition)
.Ed
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_async
spawns
.Fa "fn(arg)"
as a stackful coroutine attached to
.Fa loop .
The coroutine runs on its own stack (default 64\u00a0KiB; configurable
via
.Fn xtc_set_stack_size )
guarded by an unmapped page so stack overflow surfaces as
.Dv SIGSEGV
rather than silent memory corruption.
.Pp
A coroutine may freely use stack-resident locals; they are preserved
across
.Fn xtc_yield
and
.Fn xtc_await .
This is the headline contract that distinguishes fibers from
protothreads.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_await
blocks the caller until the awaited coroutine has returned, then
writes the coroutine's
.Vt intptr_t
return value to
.Fa *result .
When called from the main thread, it drives the loop until the target
completes; when called from inside another coroutine, it parks the
caller and resumes it once the target is done.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_yield
returns control to the loop.  The next loop step resumes the coroutine
at the line after the call.
.Sh COOPERATIVE REGIONS
The
.Dv XTC_COOP_REGION
block marks a region that runs to completion without scheduler
interleaving.  In M4 (single-thread, non-preemptive) it is a
documentation marker.  In M5 (multi-loop) it sets a
.Dq do not steal
flag for the duration of the block.
.Sh PROTOTHREADS
For platforms without a fiber substrate, xtc ships a Duff's-device
protothread implementation as a fallback.  The price is that
protothread bodies cannot use stack-resident locals across yield
points: lift them into a state struct or
.Sy static
variables.  This restriction is enforced by example, not by the
compiler.
.Pp
A protothread function returns
.Dv XTC_PT_DONE
when it falls through
.Dv XTC_PT_END
and
.Dv XTC_PT_YIELDED
when it yields.  The caller drives the protothread by calling it
repeatedly until it returns
.Dv XTC_PT_DONE .
.Sh STACK MANAGEMENT
.Fn xtc_stack_size
returns the default per-coroutine stack size in bytes.  
.Fn xtc_set_stack_size
overrides it for subsequent
.Fn xtc_async
calls; the value is rounded up to a page multiple, and a sub-16\u00a0KiB
request returns
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL .
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Dv XTC_OK
on success;
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL
on bad argument;
.Dv XTC_E_NOMEM
on stack-allocation failure;
.Dv XTC_E_INTERNAL
on platform failure
.Pq getcontext / makecontext / mmap / mprotect .
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
M4 is single-thread.
A coroutine spawned on a loop must run only on that loop's thread.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
static intptr_t multiply(void *arg) {
        int v = *(int *)arg;
        return (intptr_t)(v * 2);
}

int main(void) {
        xtc_loop_t *loop;
        xtc_task_t *t;
        int v = 21;
        intptr_t r;
        xtc_loop_init(&loop);
        xtc_async(loop, multiply, &v, &t);
        xtc_await(t, &r);     /* r == 42 */
        xtc_loop_fini(loop);
        return 0;
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_loop 3 ,
.Xr xtc_io 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
First appeared in xtc 0.0.1 (M4).
The ucontext substrate is the M4 default; per-architecture fiber asm
.Po Em make_fcontext / jump_fcontext Pc
arrives in M4.5 for ~30\u00a0ns context switches.
