.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_LWLOCK 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_lwlock_init ,
.Nm xtc_lwlock_destroy ,
.Nm xtc_lwlock_acquire ,
.Nm xtc_lwlock_acquire_cond ,
.Nm xtc_lwlock_release ,
.Nm xtc_lwlock_held_by_me
.Nd lightweight lock with shared / exclusive modes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_lwlock.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lwlock_init "xtc_lwlock_t *lock" "uint16_t tranche"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_lwlock_destroy "xtc_lwlock_t *lock"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lwlock_acquire "xtc_lwlock_t *lock" "xtc_lwlock_mode_t mode"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lwlock_acquire_cond "xtc_lwlock_t *lock" "xtc_lwlock_mode_t mode"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_lwlock_release "xtc_lwlock_t *lock"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lwlock_held_by_me "const xtc_lwlock_t *lock"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_lwlock
is a lightweight lock with shared (reader) and exclusive (writer)
modes.  Single atomic on the fast path; pthread_mutex / cond on
the contended path.  Ported from PostgreSQL's
.Pa src/backend/storage/lmgr/lwlock.c .
.Pp
The lock state is encoded in one
.Vt _Atomic uint32_t :
the high three bits hold the
.Dv LW_FLAG_HAS_WAITERS ,
.Dv LW_FLAG_WAKE_IN_PROGRESS ,
and
.Dv LW_FLAG_QUEUE_LOCKED
flags; the low bits hold either the shared-holder count or the
.Dv LW_VAL_EXCLUSIVE
sentinel.  An uncontended acquire is one CAS.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lwlock_init
initialises the lock in place.
.Fa tranche
is a user tag for diagnostics (groups locks by purpose so
profilers can attribute contention).
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lwlock_acquire
blocks until the calling thread holds the lock in
.Fa mode :
.Bl -tag -width "XTC_LW_EXCLUSIVE" -offset indent
.It Dv XTC_LW_SHARED
Multiple threads can hold the lock concurrently in shared mode.
Excluded by an exclusive holder.
.It Dv XTC_LW_EXCLUSIVE
Only one thread holds the lock; excludes all readers.
.El
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lwlock_acquire_cond
is the non-blocking variant: returns
.Dv XTC_OK
if the acquire succeeded immediately,
.Dv XTC_E_AGAIN
otherwise.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lwlock_release
drops the lock in whichever mode the calling thread acquired it.
The mode is tracked in a per-thread held-list so the caller does
not need to pass it back.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lwlock_held_by_me
returns 1 if the calling thread currently holds
.Fa lock
in any mode, 0 otherwise.  Useful in assertions and in code that
needs to call a function that might or might not already hold a
particular lock.
.Sh CHOOSING BETWEEN LOCKS
xtc ships several locks; pick by workload:
.Bl -tag -width "xtc_lockmgr" -offset indent
.It Vt xtc_lwlock
General-purpose reader/writer.  Best for short critical sections
with mixed reader/writer ratio.  This page.
.It Vt xtc_lrlock
Wait-free reads via two-copy publish.  Best for read-heavy
workloads (read:write ratio > 50:1) where reads must never
block.  See
.Xr xtc_lrlock 3 .
.It Vt xtc_lockmgr
Transactional locking with deadlock detection, multiple modes,
victim selection.  Best for database-style workloads with
named lockable objects.  See
.Xr xtc_lockmgr 3 .
.It Vt xtc_amutex
Async-aware mutex; integrates with the loop scheduler.  Use for
critical sections that span async I/O.  See
.Xr xtc_sync 3 .
.El
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn xtc_lwlock_init ,
.Fn xtc_lwlock_acquire ,
and
.Fn xtc_lwlock_acquire_cond
return
.Dv XTC_OK
on success or a negative
.Dv XTC_E_*
code.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
xtc_lwlock_t lk;
xtc_lwlock_init(&lk, /* tranche */ 1);

/* hot path: reader */
xtc_lwlock_acquire(&lk, XTC_LW_SHARED);
read_state();
xtc_lwlock_release(&lk);

/* mutator */
xtc_lwlock_acquire(&lk, XTC_LW_EXCLUSIVE);
update_state();
xtc_lwlock_release(&lk);

xtc_lwlock_destroy(&lk);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_lrlock 3 ,
.Xr xtc_lockmgr 3 ,
.Xr xtc_sync 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Ported from PostgreSQL's lrlck branch.  Appeared in xtc 0.1.
