.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_NET 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_net_listen ,
.Nm xtc_net_dial ,
.Nm xtc_net_apply_tcp_opts ,
.Nm xtc_net_setnonblock ,
.Nm xtc_net_close ,
.Nm xtc_net_unix_listen ,
.Nm xtc_net_unix_dial ,
.Nm xtc_net_unix_send_creds ,
.Nm xtc_net_unix_recv_creds ,
.Nm xtc_net_send_frame ,
.Nm xtc_net_recv_frame
.Nd networking helpers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_net.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_net_listen "xtc_net_family_t fam" "const char *host" "int port" "const xtc_tcp_opts_t *opts" "int *out_fd"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_net_dial "xtc_net_family_t fam" "const char *host" "int port" "const xtc_tcp_opts_t *opts" "int *out_fd"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_net_apply_tcp_opts "int fd" "const xtc_tcp_opts_t *opts"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_net_setnonblock "int fd"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_net_close "int fd"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_net_unix_listen "const char *path" "int *out_fd"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_net_unix_dial "const char *path" "int *out_fd"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_net_unix_send_creds "int fd" "const void *buf" "size_t buflen"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_net_unix_recv_creds "int fd" "void *buf" "size_t buflen" "uint32_t *out_uid" "uint32_t *out_gid" "size_t *out_n"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_net_send_frame "int fd" "const void *buf" "size_t len"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_net_recv_frame "int fd" "void **out" "size_t *out_len" "size_t max_len" "int64_t timeout_ns"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_net
provides convenience wrappers around the standard networking
syscalls.  The actual I/O multiplexing happens through
.Xr xtc_io 3
and
.Xr xtc_proc_wait_fd 3 ;
.Pp
.Fn xtc_net_send_frame
and
.Fn xtc_net_recv_frame
exchange a 4-byte big-endian length prefix followed by the payload.
On a non-blocking fd they yield the calling fiber on partial I/O
instead of blocking the loop, so many connections share one loop; off
a loop they fall back to
.Xr poll 2 .
.Fn xtc_net_recv_frame
allocates the frame (free it with
.Fn __os_free ) ,
and rejects a claimed length above
.Fa max_len
(0 = no cap) with
.Dv XTC_E_RANGE
so a peer cannot force an unbounded allocation; it returns
.Dv XTC_E_AGAIN
on timeout and
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL
if the peer closed mid-frame.  A zero-length frame yields
.Dv XTC_OK
with
.Fa *out
set to NULL.
these helpers handle socket creation, address resolution, knob
setting, and credential passing.
.Pp
.Sy TCP knobs
controlled by
.Vt xtc_tcp_opts_t
include:
.Bl -tag -width "user_timeout_ms" -offset indent
.It Fa nodelay
.Dv TCP_NODELAY :
disable Nagle's algorithm.  Default 1.
.It Fa reuseaddr
.Dv SO_REUSEADDR .
.It Fa reuseport
.Dv SO_REUSEPORT
on Linux/BSD; no-op elsewhere.
.It Fa keepalive
.Dv SO_KEEPALIVE
plus optional
.Fa keepidle_s ,
.Fa keepintvl_s ,
.Fa keepcnt
on Linux.
.It Fa user_timeout_ms
.Dv TCP_USER_TIMEOUT
on Linux.
.El
.Pp
.Fn xtc_net_listen
opens a non-blocking listening socket bound to
.Fa host : Ns Fa port .
.Fa fam
selects address family
.Po Dv XTC_NET_INET ,
.Dv XTC_NET_INET6 ,
or
.Dv XTC_NET_UNIX Pc .
The fd is non-blocking with
.Dv FD_CLOEXEC ;
caller can register it with
.Xr xtc_io_reg_fd 3
or pass to
.Xr xtc_proc_wait_fd 3 .
.Pp
.Fn xtc_net_dial
opens a non-blocking TCP connection.  The connect is in flight
when the call returns; caller polls for
.Dv XTC_IO_WRITABLE
to detect completion.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_net_apply_tcp_opts
applies the knobs to an already-open socket.  Useful for sockets
returned by
.Xr accept 2 .
.Pp
.Fn xtc_net_setnonblock
sets
.Dv O_NONBLOCK + Dv FD_CLOEXEC
on a fd
.Pq POSIX path or
.Dv FIONBIO
.Pq Windows path .
.Pp
.Sy Unix domain sockets:
.Fn xtc_net_unix_listen
and
.Fn xtc_net_unix_dial
open
.Dv AF_UNIX
.Dv SOCK_STREAM
sockets at the given filesystem path.  Listeners auto-unlink the
path on bind failure.
.Pp
.Sy Credential passing
on Unix sockets:
.Fn xtc_net_unix_send_creds
sends a buffer; the receiver, via
.Fn xtc_net_unix_recv_creds ,
gets the buffer plus the sender's UID and GID using
.Dv SO_PEERCRED
.Pq Linux
or
.Dv LOCAL_PEERCRED
.Pq BSD .
On platforms where neither is available, UID/GID return as 0
without error.
.Sh PLATFORM-SPECIFIC NOTES
.Bl -tag -width "Windows" -offset indent
.It Linux
.Dv SO_PEERCRED ,
io_uring + epoll backends.
.It FreeBSD/macOS
.Dv LOCAL_PEERCRED ,
kqueue backend.
.It illumos
.Dv SO_PEERCRED
emulated via
.Dv getpeerucred 3C ;
event ports backend.
.It Windows
Winsock2; UDS not supported.  TCP only.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
xtc_tcp_opts_t opts = XTC_TCP_OPTS_DEFAULT;
opts.keepalive = 1;
opts.keepidle_s = 60;

int listen_fd;
xtc_net_listen(XTC_NET_INET, "0.0.0.0", 8080, &opts, &listen_fd);

for (;;) {
    uint32_t revents;
    int conn_fd;
    xtc_proc_wait_fd(listen_fd, XTC_IO_READABLE, -1, &revents);
    conn_fd = accept(listen_fd, NULL, NULL);
    if (conn_fd < 0) continue;
    xtc_net_setnonblock(conn_fd);
    xtc_net_apply_tcp_opts(conn_fd, &opts);
    /* spawn a per-conn xtc_proc... */
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_io 3 ,
.Xr xtc_proc 3 ,
.Xr xtc_tls 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Appeared in xtc 0.1.
