.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_CHAN 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_chan_oneshot ,
.Nm xtc_chan_mpsc ,
.Nm xtc_chan_mpmc ,
.Nm xtc_chan_watch ,
.Nm xtc_chan_broadcast
.Nd typed channels for cross-task message passing
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_chan.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_chan_oneshot_create "xtc_res_t *res" "xtc_chan_oneshot_t **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_chan_oneshot_send "xtc_chan_oneshot_t *c" "void *msg"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_chan_oneshot_try_recv "xtc_chan_oneshot_t *c" "void **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_chan_mpsc_create "xtc_res_t *res" "size_t capacity" "xtc_chan_mpsc_t **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_chan_mpsc_try_send "xtc_chan_mpsc_t *c" "void *msg"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_chan_mpsc_try_recv "xtc_chan_mpsc_t *c" "void **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_chan_mpmc_create "xtc_res_t *res" "size_t capacity" "xtc_chan_mpmc_t **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_chan_watch_create "xtc_res_t *res" "void *initial" "xtc_chan_watch_t **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_chan_broadcast_create "xtc_res_t *res" "size_t capacity" "xtc_chan_broadcast_t **out"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_chan
provides typed channel primitives for cross-task / cross-process /
cross-thread message passing.  Each channel kind has different
fan-in / fan-out semantics:
.Bl -tag -width "broadcast" -offset indent
.It oneshot
A single message; one sender, one receiver.  Used for request /
reply patterns, one-shot futures.
.It mpsc
Multiple producers, single consumer.  Bounded ring buffer.  Lock-
free producer side using sequence-number CAS; consumer needs no
synchronisation.
.It mpmc
Multiple producers, multiple consumers.  Bounded ring buffer
serialising both sides via per-slot sequence numbers
.Pq Vyukov-style queue .
.It watch
Single-producer, multi-consumer of latest-value-only state.
Useful for config that may change while readers want the current
view.
.It broadcast
Multi-producer, multi-consumer fan-out.  Each subscribed
consumer sees every message.  Per-consumer lag tracking; slow
consumers see their queue fill and may drop.
.El
.Pp
All channels are heap-allocated and reference-managed via the
optional
.Vt xtc_res_t
accountant; passing one charges memory against the cap.
.Pp
.Sy Ownership :
the sender transfers ownership of the message buffer to the
receiver.  After
.Fn xtc_chan_*_send
returns
.Dv XTC_OK ,
the sender must not free or further mutate the buffer.  The
receiver is responsible for freeing.
.Sh INTEGRATION WITH xtc_proc
For BEAM-style mailboxes use
.Xr xtc_proc 3
directly: every process has its own mailbox without any explicit
channel allocation.  Channels are for fan-in / fan-out patterns
that don't fit the per-proc-mailbox model:
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
A pool of N workers consuming from one MPSC queue.
.It
N producers feeding M consumers via MPMC.
.It
Config-change broadcasts via watch channels.
.El
.Sh EXAMPLES
MPSC work queue:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
xtc_chan_mpsc_t *q;
xtc_chan_mpsc_create(NULL, /* cap */ 1024, &q);

/* producer */
xtc_chan_mpsc_try_send(q, work_item);

/* consumer */
void *item;
if (xtc_chan_mpsc_try_recv(q, &item) == XTC_OK) {
    handle(item);
    free(item);
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_proc 3 ,
.Xr xtc_res 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Appeared in xtc 0.1.
