.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt XTC_EXEC 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_exec_init ,
.Nm xtc_exec_fini ,
.Nm xtc_exec_run ,
.Nm xtc_exec_stop ,
.Nm xtc_exec_n_loops ,
.Nm xtc_exec_loop ,
.Nm xtc_exec_loop_stats ,
.Nm xtc_exec_loop_id ,
.Nm xtc_shard_id ,
.Nm xtc_shard_count ,
.Nm xtc_exec_spawn ,
.Nm xtc_exec_spawn_on ,
.Nm xtc_exec_async ,
.Nm xtc_exec_async_on
.Nd L2 multi-loop work-stealing executor
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc_exec.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exec_init "xtc_exec_t **out" "int n_loops"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exec_fini "xtc_exec_t *exec"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exec_run "xtc_exec_t *exec"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exec_stop "xtc_exec_t *exec"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exec_n_loops "xtc_exec_t *exec"
.Ft "xtc_loop_t *"
.Fn xtc_exec_loop "xtc_exec_t *exec" "int idx"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exec_loop_stats "xtc_exec_t *exec" "int idx" "xtc_loop_stats_t *out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exec_loop_id "void"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_shard_id "void"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_shard_count "void"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exec_spawn "xtc_exec_t *exec" "xtc_task_fn fn" "void *user" "xtc_task_t **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exec_spawn_on "xtc_exec_t *exec" "int idx" "xtc_task_fn fn" "void *user" "xtc_task_t **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exec_async "xtc_exec_t *exec" "xtc_coro_fn fn" "void *arg" "xtc_task_t **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exec_async_on "xtc_exec_t *exec" "int idx" "xtc_coro_fn fn" "void *arg" "xtc_task_t **out"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_exec
manages
.Em N
event loops, one per worker thread.  Each loop owns a Chase-Lev
work-stealing deque as its run queue plus an MPSC inbox for cross-thread
wakers and remote spawns.
.Sh LIFECYCLE
.Fn xtc_exec_init
constructs an executor with
.Fa n_loops
loops; non-positive values default to a small reasonable count.
.Fn xtc_exec_fini
joins every worker, frees every loop.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_exec_run
spawns
.Fa n_loops
worker threads (one per loop) and blocks on the calling thread until
the executor reaches a quiescent state \u2014 every spawned task
.Dv DONE ,
every timer fired or cancelled, every inbox drained, every deque
empty \u2014 or until
.Fn xtc_exec_stop
is called from any thread.
.Pp
Workers steal from peers when their own deque empties before going
to
.Xr xtc_io 3
.Sy poll .
M5 uses a random victim policy; NUMA-near steal ordering arrives in
M5.5.
.Sh SPAWN PLACEMENT
.Fn xtc_exec_spawn
puts the new task on a loop chosen by a round-robin counter.
.Fn xtc_exec_spawn_on
forces placement on the given loop.
The coroutine variants
.Fn xtc_exec_async
and
.Fn xtc_exec_async_on
mirror the contract.
.Pp
Spawn calls are safe from any thread, including before
.Fn xtc_exec_run :
work queued in advance is processed when the workers start.  Spawns
from a non-owner thread are routed through the target loop's inbox
and surface on the loop's next step.
.Sh CROSS-THREAD WAKERS
A
.Vt xtc_waker_t
captured on one loop may be fired from any thread; cross-thread
fires are routed through the target loop's inbox plus an
.Fn xtc_io_wakeup
ping that breaks the target out of
.Xr xtc_io 3
.Sy poll .
The wake remains idempotent: many concurrent wakes collapse to at
most one re-queue per yielded run.
.Sh THREAD AFFINITY
.Fn xtc_exec_loop_id
returns the executor index of the loop the calling task is running
on, or -1 from a thread that is not a worker.  Tests use this to
verify spawn placement and steal behaviour.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_shard_id
and
.Fn xtc_shard_count
are the Seastar-style per-shard API: the 0-based index of the loop
the caller runs on, and the number of shards.  Unlike
.Fn xtc_exec_loop_id
they treat a standalone loop
.Pq not under an executor
as shard 0 of 1, so a shared-nothing consumer can always index
per-core state with
.Fn xtc_shard_id
regardless of whether it runs under the executor or a single loop.
Both return the off-loop sentinels (-1 and 0) only when the caller is
not on any loop.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_exec_loop_stats
fills
.Fa out
with loop
.Fa idx Ns 's
work counters:
.Va tasks_run
(task steps executed on that loop) and
.Va steals
(tasks that loop stole from a peer).
The values are lock-free snapshots, for load-balance and
tail-latency diagnosis.
Note that explicitly placed work
.Pq Fn xtc_exec_spawn_on
and processes are pinned to their loop and are never stolen; only
the unpinned general task pool
.Pq Fn xtc_exec_spawn
migrates.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Dv XTC_OK
on success;
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL
on a bad argument;
.Dv XTC_E_NOMEM
on allocation failure;
.Dv XTC_E_INTERNAL
on platform failure.
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
All public functions are safe to call from any thread.
A given task handle (out_task) returned from a spawn must be used only
in ways consistent with the M3/M4 task contracts; in particular, a
.Vt xtc_waker_t
captured from one task may travel anywhere.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
static intptr_t hello(void *arg) {
        printf("hello from loop %d\\n", xtc_exec_loop_id());
        return 0;
}

int main(void) {
        xtc_exec_t *e;
        xtc_exec_init(&e, 4);
        for (int i = 0; i < 4; i++)
                xtc_exec_async(e, hello, NULL, NULL);
        xtc_exec_run(e);
        xtc_exec_fini(e);
        return 0;
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_loop 3 ,
.Xr xtc_async 3 ,
.Xr xtc_io 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
First appeared in xtc 0.0.1 (M5).  M5.5 will add NUMA-aware steal
ordering and configure-time auto-detect of CPU count via
.Sy __os_ncpus .
