.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_PDICT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_pdict_put ,
.Nm xtc_pdict_get ,
.Nm xtc_pdict_erase
.Nd Erlang-style per-process dictionary
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_pdict.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_pdict_put "const char *key" "void *value" "xtc_pdict_dtor_fn dtor"
.Ft "void *"
.Fn xtc_pdict_get "const char *key"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_pdict_erase "const char *key"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_pdict
is a per-process dictionary similar to Erlang's
.Sq put/get/erase .
Each
.Xr xtc_proc 3
has its own private key-value store; entries are auto-cleaned
when the proc exits, optionally invoking a destructor on each
value.
.Pp
The store lives in a side-table keyed by pid rather than embedded
in the proc struct, so adding a pdict entry doesn't affect the
in-struct fast path.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_pdict_put
binds
.Fa key
to
.Fa value
in the calling proc's dictionary.  If
.Fa dtor
is non-NULL, it's invoked with the prior value
.Pq if any
when the entry is replaced or erased, and on every entry when the
proc exits.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_pdict_get
returns the current value or NULL.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_pdict_erase
removes the entry, invoking the dtor if registered.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
static void my_dtor(void *p) { free(p); }

/* Stash a per-request scratch buffer in the dict. */
char *buf = malloc(4096);
xtc_pdict_put("scratch", buf, my_dtor);

/* Later in the same proc... */
char *b = xtc_pdict_get("scratch");
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_proc 3 ,
.Xr xtc_mctx 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Appeared in xtc 0.1.
