.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project — All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the PostgreSQL License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt XTC_IO 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_io_init ,
.Nm xtc_io_fini ,
.Nm xtc_io_backend_name ,
.Nm xtc_io_reg_fd ,
.Nm xtc_io_mod_fd ,
.Nm xtc_io_del_fd ,
.Nm xtc_io_poll ,
.Nm xtc_io_wakeup
.Nd L1 event-notification engine
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc_io.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_io_init "xtc_io_t **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_io_fini "xtc_io_t *io"
.Ft "const char *"
.Fn xtc_io_backend_name "void"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_io_reg_fd "xtc_io_t *io" "int fd" "uint32_t interest" "void *tag"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_io_mod_fd "xtc_io_t *io" "int fd" "uint32_t interest" "void *tag"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_io_del_fd "xtc_io_t *io" "int fd"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_io_poll "xtc_io_t *io" "xtc_io_event_t *events" "int max" \
                "int64_t timeout_ns" "int *n_out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_io_wakeup "xtc_io_t *io"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_io
is the L1 readiness-notification engine.
A single
.Vt xtc_io_t
instance manages a set of registered file descriptors plus an
internal cross-thread wakeup pipe.
.Pp
Exactly one backend is compiled in per binary, picked at configure
time:
.Bl -tag -width "epoll" -compact
.It Sy poll
The portable POSIX
.Xr poll 2
backend; the floor xtc promises on every Tier 1 platform.
.It Sy epoll
The Linux
.Xr epoll 7
backend.
.El
.Pp
.Fn xtc_io_backend_name
returns the compiled-in backend's name as a static string.
.Sh INTEREST AND EVENT FLAGS
The
.Fa interest
mask passed to
.Fn xtc_io_reg_fd Ns / Ns Fn xtc_io_mod_fd
combines:
.Bl -tag -width XTC_IO_WRITABLE -compact
.It Dv XTC_IO_READABLE
Notify when the fd is readable.
.It Dv XTC_IO_WRITABLE
Notify when the fd is writable.
.El
.Pp
The
.Va flags
field of
.Vt xtc_io_event_t
returned from
.Fn xtc_io_poll
combines:
.Bl -tag -width XTC_IO_WRITABLE -compact
.It Dv XTC_IO_READABLE
Bytes are available to read.
.It Dv XTC_IO_WRITABLE
Bytes can be written without blocking.
.It Dv XTC_IO_HUP
The peer closed the connection
.Pq for sockets and pipes .
.It Dv XTC_IO_ERR
An error occurred on the descriptor.
.It Dv XTC_IO_WAKEUP
The synthetic wakeup event delivered by
.Fn xtc_io_wakeup ;
the event's
.Va tag
is
.Dv NULL .
.El
.Sh REGISTRATION
.Fn xtc_io_reg_fd
registers a file descriptor with the engine.
The
.Fa interest
mask must be non-zero;
.Fa tag
is an opaque pointer returned in events.
A duplicate registration returns
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL ;
the caller must use
.Fn xtc_io_mod_fd
to change interest or tag on a registered fd.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_io_del_fd
unregisters; subsequent operations on that fd return
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL .
.Sh POLL AND TIMEOUT
.Fn xtc_io_poll
fills up to
.Fa max
events into
.Fa events
and writes the count to
.Fa *n_out .
.Pp
.Fa timeout_ns
is interpreted as:
.Bl -tag -width "negative" -compact
.It Sy 0
Non-blocking; return immediately.
.It Sy positive
Wait at most that many nanoseconds.
.It Sy negative
Wait indefinitely until at least one fd becomes ready or
.Fn xtc_io_wakeup
is called.
.El
.Sh CROSS-THREAD WAKEUP
.Fn xtc_io_wakeup
may be called from any thread.
A blocked
.Fn xtc_io_poll
returns within bounded time; the wakeup is delivered as a single
event with
.Dv XTC_IO_WAKEUP
flag and
.Dv NULL
.Va tag .
Multiple wakeups before the next poll coalesce into one event.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Dv XTC_OK
on success;
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL
on bad argument;
.Dv XTC_E_INTERNAL
on platform failure;
.Dv XTC_E_NOMEM
when the backend cannot allocate registration storage.
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
.Fn xtc_io_wakeup
is safe to call from any thread.
The other functions must be called from a single thread that owns the
.Vt xtc_io_t
instance
.Pq the future Em event-loop thread .
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
xtc_io_t *io;
xtc_io_event_t evs[16];
int n;

xtc_io_init(&io);
xtc_io_reg_fd(io, sockfd, XTC_IO_READABLE, my_tag);
xtc_io_poll(io, evs, 16, -1, &n);
for (int i = 0; i < n; i++) {
        if (evs[i].flags & XTC_IO_WAKEUP) handle_wakeup();
        else                              handle(evs[i].tag, evs[i].flags);
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr __os_thread 3 ,
.Xr __os_atomic 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
First appeared in xtc 0.0.1 (M2).
