.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_STATS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_counter_create ,
.Nm xtc_counter_inc ,
.Nm xtc_counter_add ,
.Nm xtc_counter_read ,
.Nm xtc_gauge_create ,
.Nm xtc_gauge_set ,
.Nm xtc_gauge_add ,
.Nm xtc_gauge_read ,
.Nm xtc_hist_create ,
.Nm xtc_hist_record ,
.Nm xtc_hist_quantile ,
.Nm xtc_hist_count ,
.Nm xtc_metrics_iterate ,
.Nm xtc_metrics_dump_prometheus
.Nd runtime statistics: counters, gauges, histograms
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_stats.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_counter_create "const char *name" "xtc_counter_t **out"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_counter_inc "xtc_counter_t *c"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_counter_add "xtc_counter_t *c" "int64_t delta"
.Ft uint64_t
.Fn xtc_counter_read "const xtc_counter_t *c"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_gauge_create "const char *name" "xtc_gauge_t **out"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_gauge_set "xtc_gauge_t *g" "int64_t v"
.Ft int64_t
.Fn xtc_gauge_read "const xtc_gauge_t *g"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_hist_create "const char *name" "xtc_hist_t **out"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_hist_record "xtc_hist_t *h" "int64_t value_ns"
.Ft int64_t
.Fn xtc_hist_quantile "const xtc_hist_t *h" "double q"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_metrics_iterate "xtc_metric_visit_fn fn" "void *user"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_metrics_dump_prometheus "int fd"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_stats
is the runtime telemetry layer.  Three metric kinds:
.Bl -tag -width "histogram" -offset indent
.It counter
Monotonic non-negative count
.Po requests served, errors observed Pc .
.It gauge
Current value, can move up or down
.Po active connections, queue depth Pc .
.It histogram
Distribution; supports quantile queries
.Pq p50, p99, p999 .
For latency tracking.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Concurrency safety :
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
Counters are
.Em per-CPU sharded :
.Fn xtc_counter_inc
hits one cache-line-isolated atomic on the calling CPU.  No
cross-CPU coherence traffic on the hot path.  Reads sum all
shards.
.It
Gauges are a single
.Vt _Atomic int64_t .
For low-frequency-update gauges this is fine; high-frequency
gauges should be modeled as a counter pair instead.
.It
Histograms are per-CPU sharded
.Pq one log-linear bucket array per CPU ;
.Fn xtc_hist_record
hits one shard's atomic counter.
.Fn xtc_hist_quantile
merges shards under no lock
.Pq relaxed atomic loads .
.El
.Pp
.Sy Observability discipline :
the implementation is designed not to obscure observability tools.
Updating a counter compiles to one CPU-shard
.Vt sched_getcpu
.Pq cached in TLS
plus one
.Vt atomic_fetch_add ;
under
.Xr perf-stat 1
this shows up as the program's CPU pattern, not as overhead in
the telemetry layer.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_counter_create ,
.Fn xtc_gauge_create ,
.Fn xtc_hist_create
register the metric in a global registry keyed by
.Fa name
.Pq up to 64 chars .
The registry supports walking via
.Fn xtc_metrics_iterate
or dumping in Prometheus exposition format via
.Fn xtc_metrics_dump_prometheus
to a file descriptor.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
xtc_counter_t *requests;
xtc_hist_t    *latency;

xtc_counter_create("rexis.requests", &requests);
xtc_hist_create  ("rexis.req_latency_ns", &latency);

/* Hot path: */
int64_t t0 = now_ns();
handle_request();
xtc_counter_inc(requests);
xtc_hist_record(latency, now_ns() - t0);

/* Periodic dump (e.g. via xtc_timer): */
xtc_metrics_dump_prometheus(scrape_fd);
.Ed
.Sh PROMETHEUS OUTPUT
.Fn xtc_metrics_dump_prometheus
emits, for each metric:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
# TYPE rexis.requests counter
rexis.requests 12345
# TYPE rexis.queue_depth gauge
rexis.queue_depth 42
# TYPE rexis.req_latency_ns histogram
rexis.req_latency_ns_count 12345
rexis.req_latency_ns_p50 1500
rexis.req_latency_ns_p99 9800
rexis.req_latency_ns_p999 24000
.Ed
.Pp
A trivial scrape server reads
.Fa fd
and forwards to HTTP.  See
.Pa examples/05_rexis/metrics.c
for an example dump-on-timer pattern.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_log 3 ,
.Xr xtc_cfg 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7 ,
.Xr perf-stat 1
.Sh HISTORY
Appeared in xtc 0.1.
