.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_CFG 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_cfg_register_bool ,
.Nm xtc_cfg_register_int ,
.Nm xtc_cfg_register_int64 ,
.Nm xtc_cfg_register_double ,
.Nm xtc_cfg_register_string ,
.Nm xtc_cfg_register_enum ,
.Nm xtc_cfg_set ,
.Nm xtc_cfg_get
.Nd typed runtime configuration registry
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_cfg.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_cfg_register_bool "const char *name" "int *out_var" "int default_v" "const char *help"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_cfg_register_int "const char *name" "int *out_var" "int default_v" "int min" "int max" "const char *help"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_cfg_register_int64 "const char *name" "int64_t *out_var" "int64_t default_v" "int64_t min" "int64_t max" "const char *help"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_cfg_register_double "const char *name" "double *out_var" "double default_v" "double min" "double max" "const char *help"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_cfg_register_string "const char *name" "char *buf" "size_t buflen" "const char *default_v" "const char *help"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_cfg_set "const char *name" "const char *value"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_cfg
is a typed runtime configuration registry, modeled on PostgreSQL's
GUC system.  Modules register named knobs at startup; operators
set them by name; values get bound to live variables and validated
against type and bounds.
.Pp
Supported types:
.Dv bool , int , int64 , double , string , enum .
Each
.Fn xtc_cfg_register_*
takes:
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
A canonical name
.Pq dot-separated, e.g. Sq rexis.max_clients .
.It
A backing storage pointer.  When the cfg value changes, the
storage is updated atomically.
.It
A default and bounds
.Pq for numeric types .
.It
A help string used in
.Sq cfg dump
output.
.El
.Pp
.Fn xtc_cfg_set
parses the string value to the registered type, validates against
bounds, and updates the backing variable.  An optional on-change
callback fires.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_cfg_get
.Pq via type-specific overloads
reads the current value.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
static int g_max_clients = 1000;

xtc_cfg_register_int("rexis.max_clients", &g_max_clients,
                      1000, 1, 100000,
                      "Maximum concurrent client connections");

/* Operator runtime change: */
xtc_cfg_set("rexis.max_clients", "5000");
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_log 3 ,
.Xr xtc_stats 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Appeared in xtc 0.1.
