.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_SVR 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_svr_start ,
.Nm xtc_svr_stop ,
.Nm xtc_svr_join ,
.Nm xtc_svr_call ,
.Nm xtc_svr_call_abortable ,
.Nm xtc_svr_cast ,
.Nm xtc_svr_reply ,
.Nm xtc_svr_call_save ,
.Nm xtc_svr_pid
.Nd gen_server-style request/reply server abstraction
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_orc.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_svr_start "xtc_loop_t *loop" "const xtc_svr_callbacks_t *cb" "void *state" "const xtc_svr_opts_t *opts" "xtc_svr_t **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_svr_stop "xtc_svr_t *s"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_svr_join "xtc_svr_t *s" "int64_t timeout_ns"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_svr_call "xtc_pid_t target" "const void *req" "size_t req_size" "void **out_reply" "size_t *out_size" "int64_t timeout_ns"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_svr_call_abortable "xtc_pid_t target" "const void *req" "size_t req_size" "void **out_reply" "size_t *out_size" "int64_t timeout_ns" "xtc_abort_token_t *tok"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_svr_cast "xtc_pid_t target" "const void *msg" "size_t size"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_svr_reply "xtc_svr_call_t *call" "const void *reply" "size_t size"
.Ft xtc_svr_call_t *
.Fn xtc_svr_call_save "const xtc_svr_call_t *call"
.Ft xtc_pid_t
.Fn xtc_svr_pid "const xtc_svr_t *s"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_svr
is the gen_server analog: a long-lived process that handles
synchronous calls and asynchronous casts via user-supplied
callbacks.  Models the OTP gen_server pattern.
.Pp
.Sy Callbacks
.Pq Vt xtc_svr_callbacks_t :
.Bl -tag -width "handle_call" -offset indent
.It Va init
Called once at server start.  Returns
.Dv XTC_OK
to proceed or any
.Dv XTC_E_*
to abort startup.
.It Va handle_call
Invoked on synchronous request from a client.  Must call
.Fn xtc_svr_reply
to satisfy the caller.  Return
.Dv XTC_SVR_CONTINUE
or
.Dv XTC_SVR_STOP .
.It Va handle_cast
Asynchronous (no-reply) message.
.It Va handle_info
Raw mailbox message
.Pq sent via Xr xtc_send 3 ,
not call/cast .
.It Va terminate
Called on graceful shutdown; cleanup hook.
.El
.Pp
.Fn xtc_svr_call
sends a request and blocks until reply or timeout.  In-process
callers
.Pq from another xtc_proc
route via tag-and-pid through the caller's mailbox; external
threads use slot-and-notify.  Both paths return the same way.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_svr_call_abortable
is the same call with cooperative cancellation: while it waits for the
reply it polls
.Fa tok
(see
.Xr xtc_sync 3 ) ,
and returns
.Dv XTC_E_ABORTED
if the token's source is fired before the reply arrives.  Fire the
source from a statement timeout or a cancel-request path to deliver a
cancel at the next wait point.  Cancellation stops only the caller's
wait; the server keeps processing the request, and a late reply is
discarded.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_svr_cast
fires-and-forgets a message.  Returns immediately.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_svr_reply
sent from inside
.Va handle_call
to satisfy the calling client.  Must be called exactly once per
call.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_svr_call_save
enables a
.Em deferred
reply (the OTP
.Fn gen_server:reply/2
pattern).  The
.Vt xtc_svr_call_t
passed to
.Va handle_call
is valid only for that callback.  To reply later -- when a batch
fills, when other shards answer, when a timer fires --
call
.Fn xtc_svr_call_save
inside
.Va handle_call
to obtain a heap-allocated handle that outlives the callback, stash
it in the server state, return
.Dv XTC_SVR_NOREPLY ,
and call
.Fn xtc_svr_reply
on the saved handle from any later callback.
.Fn xtc_svr_reply
frees a saved handle after sending.  This is safe for in-proc callers
(the reply routes to the caller's mailbox by tag); an off-proc caller
must remain blocked in
.Fn xtc_svr_call
until the deferred reply is sent.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct kv_state { /* ... */ };

static int my_init(void *st) { /* ... */ return XTC_OK; }

static int
my_call(void *st, const void *req, size_t sz, xtc_svr_call_t *call)
{
    struct kv_state *s = st;
    /* ... compute reply ... */
    xtc_svr_reply(call, reply_buf, reply_sz);
    return XTC_SVR_CONTINUE;
}

xtc_svr_callbacks_t cb = {
    .init = my_init, .handle_call = my_call, /* ... */
};
xtc_svr_t *s;
xtc_svr_start(loop, &cb, &state, NULL, &s);

/* ... */

void *reply; size_t reply_sz;
xtc_svr_call(xtc_svr_pid(s), req, req_sz, &reply, &reply_sz,
             5000LL * 1000 * 1000);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_supervisor 3 ,
.Xr xtc_app 3 ,
.Xr xtc_proc 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Appeared in xtc 0.1.
