.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt XTC_LOOP 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_loop_init ,
.Nm xtc_loop_fini ,
.Nm xtc_loop_run ,
.Nm xtc_loop_stop ,
.Nm xtc_loop_res ,
.Nm xtc_task_spawn ,
.Nm xtc_task_waker ,
.Nm xtc_task_park_on_timer ,
.Nm xtc_task_park_on_fd ,
.Nm xtc_waker_wake ,
.Nm xtc_timer_set ,
.Nm xtc_timer_cancel
.Nd L2 single-thread event loop, tasks, wakers, timers
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc_loop.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_loop_init "xtc_loop_t **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_loop_fini "xtc_loop_t *loop"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_loop_run "xtc_loop_t *loop"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_loop_stop "xtc_loop_t *loop"
.Ft "struct xtc_res *"
.Fn xtc_loop_res "xtc_loop_t *loop"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_task_spawn "xtc_loop_t *loop" "xtc_task_fn fn" "void *user" "xtc_task_t **out_task"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_task_waker "xtc_task_t *task" "xtc_waker_t *out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_task_park_on_timer "xtc_task_t *self" "int64_t delay_ns"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_task_park_on_fd "xtc_task_t *self" "int fd" "uint32_t interest"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_waker_wake "const xtc_waker_t *w"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_timer_set "xtc_loop_t *loop" "int64_t delay_ns" \
                   "xtc_timer_fn fn" "void *user" "xtc_timer_t **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_timer_cancel "xtc_timer_t *timer"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The L2 event loop drives a single OS thread.
A loop owns one
.Vt xtc_io_t ,
a FIFO run queue of ready tasks, and a min-heap of pending timers.
.Pp
A task is a small struct carrying a function pointer, a state, and an
opaque user pointer.
The function is called by the loop whenever the task becomes
runnable; its return value tells the loop what to do next:
.Bl -tag -width XTC_TASK_PENDING -compact
.It Dv XTC_TASK_DONE
The task is finished and is reaped at
.Fn xtc_loop_fini .
.It Dv XTC_TASK_RESCHED
Re-queue the task at the back of the run queue.
.It Dv XTC_TASK_PENDING
The task is waiting on a wakeup; do not run it again until either
its waker fires or the timer / fd it parked on becomes ready.
.El
.Sh LIFECYCLE
.Fn xtc_loop_init
allocates a fresh loop with no spawned tasks.  Each loop owns a
resource accountant
.Pq Vt xtc_res_t
with default caps; access it via
.Fn xtc_loop_res .
.Pp
.Fn xtc_loop_run
runs until every spawned task has returned
.Dv XTC_TASK_DONE
and every pending timer has fired or been cancelled.
.Fn xtc_loop_stop
flips a flag that causes the loop to return after the current task
step completes.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_loop_fini
frees every task ever spawned, every timer ever created (live or
fired), the loop's
.Vt xtc_io_t ,
and the loop struct itself.
.Sh TASKS
.Fn xtc_task_spawn
creates a new task in
.Dv XTC_TASK_RESCHED
state and enqueues it.
The function pointer
.Fa fn
is invoked with the task handle and the
.Fa user
pointer the caller supplied at spawn.
The handle written to
.Fa *out_task
is valid for the lifetime of the loop.
.Sh WAKERS
.Fn xtc_task_waker
fills a
.Vt xtc_waker_t
that the caller may store and later use to re-queue the parked task
via
.Fn xtc_waker_wake .
A waker may be fired any number of times: only the first transition
from
.Dv XTC_TASK_PENDING
to
.Dv XTC_TASK_RESCHED
re-queues the task; subsequent wakes while the task is already
scheduled or running are no-ops.
A waker fired after the task has reached
.Dv XTC_TASK_DONE
is a safe no-op.
.Pp
M3 wakers are valid only on the owning thread.  Cross-thread wakeup
arrives in M5.
.Sh PARKING
.Fn xtc_task_park_on_timer
arranges for the task to be re-queued after at least
.Fa delay_ns
nanoseconds.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_task_park_on_fd
registers the task with the loop's
.Vt xtc_io_t
for readiness on
.Fa fd .
When the fd becomes ready, the loop unregisters it and re-queues the
task.
.Pp
A task may have at most one outstanding park (timer or fd) at a time.
A second park while the first is in flight returns
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL .
After parking, the task fn must return
.Dv XTC_TASK_PENDING .
.Sh TIMERS
.Fn xtc_timer_set
schedules a callback to fire after at least
.Fa delay_ns
nanoseconds.
The handle written to
.Fa *out
remains valid for the lifetime of the loop, including after the
timer has fired
.Pq see Fn xtc_timer_cancel .
.Pp
.Fn xtc_timer_cancel
prevents a not-yet-fired timer from firing.
A cancel after the timer has already fired is a safe no-op.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Dv XTC_OK
on success;
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL
on a bad argument;
.Dv XTC_E_NOMEM
on allocation failure;
.Dv XTC_E_INTERNAL
on platform failure.
.Sh THREAD SAFETY
M3 is single-thread.
A loop must be created, run, and finalised by the same OS thread.
The cross-thread wakeup primitive baked into
.Vt xtc_io_t
exists but is not yet exposed at the loop / task level; that arrives
with the multi-loop executor in M5.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
static int hello(xtc_task_t *self, void *u) {
        (void)self; (void)u;
        printf("hello\\n");
        return XTC_TASK_DONE;
}

int main(void) {
        xtc_loop_t *loop;
        xtc_loop_init(&loop);
        xtc_task_spawn(loop, hello, NULL, NULL);
        xtc_loop_run(loop);
        xtc_loop_fini(loop);
        return 0;
}
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_io 3 ,
.Xr __os_thread 3 ,
.Xr __os_time 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
First appeared in xtc 0.0.1 (M3).
