.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_PROC 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_proc_spawn ,
.Nm xtc_self ,
.Nm xtc_send ,
.Nm xtc_recv ,
.Nm xtc_recv_match ,
.Nm xtc_recv_correlate ,
.Nm xtc_proc_wait_fd ,
.Nm xtc_exit_self ,
.Nm xtc_exit_pid ,
.Nm xtc_link ,
.Nm xtc_unlink ,
.Nm xtc_monitor ,
.Nm xtc_proc_mailbox_stats ,
.Nm xtc_fault_guard_install ,
.Nm xtc_proc_recovery_arm ,
.Nm xtc_proc_critical_enter
.Nd BEAM-style lightweight processes with mailboxes
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_proc.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_proc_spawn "xtc_loop_t *loop" "xtc_proc_fn fn" "void *arg" "const xtc_proc_opts_t *opts" "xtc_pid_t *out_pid"
.Ft xtc_pid_t
.Fn xtc_self "void"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_send "xtc_pid_t target" "const void *data" "size_t size"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_recv "void **out" "size_t *out_size" "int64_t timeout_ns"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_recv_match "xtc_match_fn match_fn" "void *user_data" "void **out" "size_t *out_size" "int64_t timeout_ns"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_recv_correlate "const void *corr_value" "size_t corr_size" "int n_expected" "xtc_msg_t *out_msgs" "int *out_n" "int64_t timeout_ns"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_proc_wait_fd "int fd" "uint32_t interest" "int64_t timeout_ns" "uint32_t *out_revents"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exit_self "int reason"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_exit_pid "xtc_pid_t pid" "int reason"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_link "xtc_pid_t other"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_unlink "xtc_pid_t other"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_monitor "xtc_pid_t target" "uint64_t *out_ref"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_proc_mailbox_stats "xtc_pid_t pid" "xtc_mailbox_stats_t *out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_fault_guard_install "void"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_proc_recovery_arm "void"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_proc_recovery_disarm "void"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_proc_critical_enter "void"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_proc_critical_leave "void"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
xtc processes are BEAM-style lightweight actors: each has an
identity
.Pq Vt xtc_pid_t ,
a private mailbox, and a stack-backed coroutine that runs
co-operatively inside an
.Xr xtc_loop 3 .
Communication is by message passing.  Failures are isolated by
.Xr xtc_supervisor 3
or by manual link/monitor.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_proc_spawn
creates a new process running
.Fa fn ( arg ) .
The process runs on
.Fa loop
co-operatively with all other procs and tasks on that loop.
.Fa opts
is optional and may set the mailbox capacity, initial stack size,
or per-proc resource accountant.
.Pp
A process is pinned to
.Fa loop
for its lifetime: it runs only on that loop and is never migrated by
work-stealing.  This affinity is guaranteed and requires no opt-in --
only raw
.Xr xtc_exec 3
tasks are stealable.  Embedders that pin a worker to one loop (e.g. a
PostgreSQL backend per loop) can rely on it.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_self
returns the calling process's pid, or
.Dv XTC_PID_NONE
if called outside a process context.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_send
appends an envelope holding a copy of
.Fa data\^\& [ 0 .. size )
to the mailbox of
.Fa target .
Returns
.Dv XTC_OK
on success,
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL
if the target is dead, or
.Dv XTC_E_AGAIN
if the target's mailbox is full and bounded.
Sending is asynchronous: the send returns immediately whether or
not the receiver is currently scheduled.
.Pp
Mailboxes are bounded by
.Fa mailbox_cap
(default 4096) so that a fast sender cannot drive the receiver
out of memory.
A caller that ignores an
.Dv XTC_E_AGAIN
return silently loses the message.
Senders therefore MUST handle it: retry later, shed and account the
load, apply end-to-end flow control, or treat it as fatal on a
must-deliver path.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_recv
delivers the next message from the calling proc's mailbox in
arrival order.  If the mailbox is empty,
.Fa timeout_ns
controls behaviour:
.Bl -tag -width "timeout_ns < 0" -offset indent
.It Fa timeout_ns < 0
Block forever.
.It Fa timeout_ns == 0
Return
.Dv XTC_E_AGAIN
immediately if no message is queued.
.It Fa timeout_ns > 0
Block up to that many nanoseconds, then return
.Dv XTC_E_AGAIN
on timeout.
.El
The delivered buffer is owned by the caller and must be
.Xr free 3 'd
when no longer needed.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_recv_match
performs selective receive: the callback
.Fa match_fn
is invoked for each envelope in arrival order; the first one for
which it returns 1 is delivered.  Non-matching envelopes are
parked in a save queue and re-checked on the next call only if
the predicate has changed (BEAM-style recv-mark optimisation).
.Pp
.Fn xtc_recv_correlate
collects
.Fa n_expected
messages whose first
.Fa corr_size
bytes match
.Fa corr_value .
Useful for fork-join patterns where the parent assigns each
child a correlation id and waits for replies tagged with that id.
The collected messages are written to
.Fa out_msgs ;
.Fa *out_n
is set to the count actually delivered (which may be less than
.Fa n_expected
if the timeout fires first).
.Pp
.Fn xtc_proc_wait_fd
blocks until any of:
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
.Fa fd
becomes ready in any
.Fa interest
direction
.Pq Dv XTC_IO_READABLE | XTC_IO_WRITABLE | XTC_IO_HUP | XTC_IO_ERR ,
.It
a message arrives in the calling proc's mailbox
.Pq Dv XTC_WAIT_MAILBOX
.It
the timeout elapses
.Pq Dv XTC_WAIT_TIMEOUT
.It
the proc is killed via
.Fn xtc_exit_pid .
.El
.Fa *out_revents
receives a bitmask of which conditions fired.  This is the
canonical way to write an idle-CPU-zero server: the proc sleeps
until something real happens.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_exit_self
terminates the calling process; cleanup runs and any links /
monitors fire.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_exit_pid
terminates another process by pid.  Asynchronous; the target
notices on its next yield or
.Fn xtc_recv
parking point.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_link
creates a bidirectional link.  If either end exits with a
non-normal reason, the other receives an
.Sq EXIT
signal in its mailbox.
.Fn xtc_unlink
removes the link.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_monitor
creates a unidirectional monitor.  The watcher receives a
.Sq DOWN
message
.Po Vt {kind='D', ref, pid, reason} Pc
when the monitored process exits.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_proc_mailbox_stats
snapshots a process's mailbox into
.Fa out :
the current
.Va depth ,
the selective-receive
.Va saved
count, the high-water
.Va peak ,
the
.Va cap ,
and lifetime
.Va recv_total
and
.Va drop_total
counts (messages accepted and rejected).  It is safe to call from any
thread and is the basis for an overload / head-of-line-buildup scrape.
.Pp
The capacity bound applies to
.Va depth No + Va saved ,
not the mailbox alone: a selective receiver that moves non-matching
messages aside still counts them, so a flood of non-matching traffic
cannot grow a process without limit by draining the mailbox into the
save queue.  A consequence is that a process selectively waiting for a
message while its budget fills with non-matching ones will see further
sends rejected with
.Dv XTC_E_AGAIN
(including the awaited one): the bound is a hard backpressure contract,
so design selective waits with that in mind (prefer
.Fn xtc_recv_correlate
and bounded timeouts).
.Pp
A process can also be given a mailbox watermark via
.Va xtc_proc_opts_t.mailbox_watermark_pct
(1..100; 0 disables) plus
.Va mailbox_watermark_fn
and
.Va mailbox_watermark_user .
When an accepted message first brings the depth to that percent of the
cap, the callback fires once on the rising edge -- so an application
can shed load before the hard cap rejects with
.Dv XTC_E_AGAIN .
The callback runs on the sender's thread outside the mailbox lock and
must not block.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_fault_guard_install
installs a process-wide handler for the synchronous, fiber-directed
faults
.Dv SIGSEGV , SIGBUS , SIGFPE
and
.Dv SIGILL
on an alternate signal stack.
.Fn xtc_proc_recovery_arm
arms a recovery frame for the calling process (used like
.Xr sigsetjmp 3 :
it returns 0 normally and the fault signal number when a contained
fault returns control there).  On such a fault the handler identifies
the faulting process -- it is the faulting thread's running process --
and, if it armed a recovery frame and is not in a critical section,
unwinds only that fiber back to the frame; siblings on the loop are
untouched.  The recovered process releases its resources and calls
.Fn xtc_exit_self ,
so a supervisor observes the fault as a normal
.Sq DOWN .
.Fn xtc_proc_critical_enter
and
.Fn xtc_proc_critical_leave
bracket a region in which a fault must NOT be contained -- shared
state may be torn -- so it escalates to process abort, preserving the
embedder's critical-section panic semantics.  The recovery frame only
unwinds the call stack; locks, fds, allocations and other resources
held at fault time are the recovery block's responsibility to
release.  Containment is POSIX-only; on Windows the calls compile but
a fault keeps its process-wide disposition.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
All entry points return
.Dv XTC_OK
on success.  Negative values are stable
.Dv XTC_E_*
codes; see
.Xr xtc_strerror 3 .
.Sh EXAMPLES
A request-reply pattern with selective receive and timeouts:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
static void server(void *arg) {
    void *msg; size_t sz;
    for (;;) {
        if (xtc_recv(&msg, &sz, 5000LL * 1000 * 1000) != XTC_OK)
            continue;
        /* ... handle msg, reply via xtc_send to msg->reply_to ... */
        free(msg);
    }
}

xtc_pid_t pid;
xtc_proc_spawn(loop, server, NULL, NULL, &pid);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_chan 3 ,
.Xr xtc_loop 3 ,
.Xr xtc_supervisor 3 ,
.Xr xtc_svr 3 ,
.Xr xtc_strerror 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
.Nm
appeared in xtc 0.1.
