.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_TLS 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_tls_ctx_create ,
.Nm xtc_tls_ctx_destroy ,
.Nm xtc_tls_create ,
.Nm xtc_tls_destroy ,
.Nm xtc_tls_handshake ,
.Nm xtc_tls_read ,
.Nm xtc_tls_write ,
.Nm xtc_tls_shutdown ,
.Nm xtc_tls_wants_read ,
.Nm xtc_tls_wants_write
.Nd TLS over async sockets
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_tls.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_tls
provides TLS 1.2 / 1.3 over xtc_io sockets.  The implementation
selects a backend at configure time
.Pq Sq --with-tls=openssl|none|auto ;
in v0.x only OpenSSL is implemented.
.Pp
.Sy Per-connection state machine :
.Bl -tag -width "wants_write" -offset indent
.It Vt xtc_tls_ctx_t
Per-process state: cert, key, CA bundle, version range, ALPN
profile.  Created once via
.Fn xtc_tls_ctx_create
with role
.Pq Dv XTC_TLS_SERVER or Dv XTC_TLS_CLIENT
plus opts.
.It Vt xtc_tls_t
Per-connection state.  Wraps a single fd.  Created via
.Fn xtc_tls_create "ctx" "fd" "&out" .
.El
.Pp
.Sy Non-blocking handshake :
.Bd -literal -offset indent
xtc_tls_create(ctx, fd, &tls);
for (;;) {
    int rc = xtc_tls_handshake(tls);
    if (rc == XTC_OK) break;
    if (rc != XTC_E_AGAIN) abort();
    uint32_t want = xtc_tls_wants_read(tls)
                  ? XTC_IO_READABLE : XTC_IO_WRITABLE;
    xtc_proc_wait_fd(fd, want, -1, &revents);
}
.Ed
.Pp
.Fn xtc_tls_read
and
.Fn xtc_tls_write
follow the same pattern: return
.Dv XTC_OK
on progress,
.Dv XTC_E_AGAIN
when the fd needs more poll iterations.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_tls_shutdown
performs the bidirectional close-notify dance; same WANT_*
translation.
.Sh OPTIONS
.Vt xtc_tls_opts_t
fields:
.Bl -tag -width "verify_peer" -offset indent
.It Va cert_file , key_file
PEM paths for server-side certificate.
.It Va ca_file
PEM CA bundle for verifying the peer.
.It Va verify_peer
.Dv 1
to require + validate the peer's cert.
.It Va alpn_protos
ALPN wire-form list.
.It Va min_version , max_version
.Dv XTC_TLS_VER_12
or
.Dv XTC_TLS_VER_13 .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_io 3 ,
.Xr xtc_net 3 ,
.Xr xtc_proc 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Appeared in xtc 0.1.  See
.Pa docs/M_TLS.md
for backend pluggability planning.
