.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_INJECT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_inject_attach ,
.Nm xtc_inject_attach_wait ,
.Nm xtc_inject_detach ,
.Nm xtc_inject_trigger ,
.Nm xtc_inject_check ,
.Nm xtc_inject_wakeup ,
.Nm XTC_INJECTION_POINT
.Nd fault-injection points
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_inject.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_inject_attach "const char *name" "xtc_inject_fn fn" "void *user"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_inject_attach_wait "const char *name"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_inject_detach "const char *name"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_inject_trigger "const char *name"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_inject_check "const char *name"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_inject_wakeup "const char *name"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_inject
is a fault-injection framework modeled on PostgreSQL's
.Pa src/include/utils/injection_point.h .
Production code sprinkles
.Fn XTC_INJECTION_POINT name
calls at interesting locations
.Pq error paths, race windows, slow paths .
Tests can attach a callback or
.Sq wait
semantics to a named point at runtime; when the point fires, the
callback runs (or the trigger blocks until
.Fn xtc_inject_wakeup
is called from the test).
.Pp
.Sy Three operations :
.Bl -tag -width "TRIGGER" -offset indent
.It Sy ATTACH
Bind a callback (or "wait" semantics) to the name.  Up to 4
attachments per name.
.It Sy DETACH
Remove all attachments for a name.
.It Sy TRIGGER
Fire the point.  No-op if nothing attached
.Pq production fast path .
.El
.Pp
.Fn xtc_inject_check
is a lock-free probe: returns 1 if the name has any attachments,
0 otherwise.  Production code uses this to substitute an error
path:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if (xtc_inject_check("io.calloc_fail")) {
    xtc_inject_trigger("io.calloc_fail");
    return XTC_E_NOMEM;
}
.Ed
.Pp
The hot-path cost when nothing is attached is one atomic load
.Pq the global Sq attached_count .
.Pp
.Sy Compile-time gating :
defining
.Dv XTC_INJECT_DISABLE
elides all
.Fn XTC_INJECTION_POINT
calls to a no-op.  Production builds may opt out entirely; debug
and test builds keep the framework live.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
/* In production code: */
int xtc_io_init(xtc_io_t **out) {
    XTC_INJECTION_POINT("io.init.calloc_fail");
    if (xtc_inject_check("io.init.calloc_fail"))
        return XTC_E_NOMEM;
    /* ... real code ... */
}

/* In a test: */
xtc_inject_attach("io.init.calloc_fail", my_callback, NULL);
int rc = xtc_io_init(&io);
munit_assert_int(rc, ==, XTC_E_NOMEM);
xtc_inject_detach("io.init.calloc_fail");
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_log 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Appeared in xtc 0.1.
