.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_SLAB 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_slab_create ,
.Nm xtc_slab_destroy ,
.Nm xtc_slab_alloc ,
.Nm xtc_slab_free ,
.Nm xtc_slab_reap ,
.Nm xtc_slab_stat ,
.Nm xtc_slab_offset ,
.Nm xtc_slab_resolve ,
.Nm xtc_slab_pressure_listen ,
.Nm xtc_slab_reaper_spawn
.Nd slab + magazine allocator
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_slab.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_slab_create "const xtc_slab_opts_t *opts" "xtc_slab_t **out"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_slab_destroy "xtc_slab_t *slab"
.Ft "void *"
.Fn xtc_slab_alloc "xtc_slab_t *slab"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_slab_free "xtc_slab_t *slab" "void *obj"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_slab_reap "xtc_slab_t *slab"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_slab_stat "const xtc_slab_t *slab" "xtc_slab_stats_t *out"
.Ft xtc_slab_off_t
.Fn xtc_slab_offset "const xtc_slab_t *slab" "const void *p"
.Ft "void *"
.Fn xtc_slab_resolve "const xtc_slab_t *slab" "xtc_slab_off_t off"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_slab_pressure_listen "const char *psi_path" "xtc_slab_pressure_fn fn" "void *user"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_slab_reaper_spawn "xtc_loop_t *loop" "int64_t interval_ns" "xtc_pid_t *out_pid"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_slab
is a libumem-style slab allocator with per-loop magazines.  Every
fixed-size hot-path allocation in xtc routes through it
.Pq lockmgr lock entries, proc link/monitor entries, RCU retired
.Pq nodes, timer nodes ;
applications can use it directly for any pool of same-sized
objects.
.Pp
A
.Vt slab
is a cache of objects of a single size.  Objects are carved from
.Va chunks
.Pq mmap'd regions, default 64 KiB ;
each chunk holds many slots.  Free objects are linked through
their first
.Va sizeof(void *)
bytes.
.Pp
.Sy Magazines :
each thread keeps a small per-cache cache
.Pq default 16 slots
of recently-freed objects.  Allocs hit the magazine
.Pq lock-free, no atomics ;
on miss the cache lock is taken and the magazine is refilled
from a partial chunk.  Frees push to the magazine; when full,
the magazine spills back to the cache under lock.
.Pp
.Sy Constructor / destructor :
optional callbacks run once per object lifetime.  Constructor on
the first time an object is pulled from a slot; destructor at
cache destroy or chunk reap.
.Pp
.Sy Storage modes:
.Bl -tag -width "XTC_SLAB_PROCESS_LOCAL" -offset indent
.It Dv XTC_SLAB_PROCESS_LOCAL
Default.  Chunks via
.Xr mmap 2
.Dv MAP_ANONYMOUS .
.It Dv XTC_SLAB_SHARED_MEMORY
Caller passes an mmap'd
.Dv MAP_SHARED
fd; the slab carves chunks from that region.  Object handles are
.Vt xtc_slab_off_t
offsets that two processes can resolve to local pointers using
.Fn xtc_slab_resolve .
The shared header at the start of the region holds an atomic
cursor so concurrent processes don't collide on chunk allocation.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Debug flags :
.Bl -tag -width "XTC_SLAB_BACKTRACE" -compact -offset indent
.It Dv XTC_SLAB_REDZONE
8-byte magic before+after every object; checked on free.
.It Dv XTC_SLAB_AUDIT
64-event ring of recent (alloc, free) events.
.It Dv XTC_SLAB_BACKTRACE
Backtrace each event
.Pq Linux/glibc only .
.It Dv XTC_SLAB_NO_MAGAZINE
Always go through the cache lock.  For diagnostic use.
.El
.Pp
.Sy OOM policies
control behaviour when no chunk can be allocated:
.Bl -tag -width "XTC_SLAB_OOM_BACKOFF" -compact -offset indent
.It Dv XTC_SLAB_OOM_FAIL
Return NULL.  Default.
.It Dv XTC_SLAB_OOM_BACKOFF
Brief usleep + retry once, then NULL.
.It Dv XTC_SLAB_OOM_ABORT
.Fn abort
.Pq debug builds .
.El
.Pp
.Fn xtc_slab_create
allocates a cache.
.Fa opts
is required and must set
.Fa opts->name
and
.Fa opts->obj_size .
.Pp
.Fn xtc_slab_alloc
returns a fresh object pointer or NULL on OOM.
.Fn xtc_slab_free
returns it to the cache.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_slab_reap
drops magazines and returns empty chunks to the OS.  Useful under
memory pressure.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_slab_pressure_listen
attaches a callback that fires when Linux PSI memory pressure is
detected.  When triggered, all registered slab caches are reaped.
Returns
.Dv XTC_E_NOSYS
on platforms without PSI.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_slab_reaper_spawn
spawns an
.Xr xtc_proc 3
that periodically calls
.Fn xtc_slab_reap_all
.Pq returns total objects reaped .
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct widget { int id; char name[32]; };

xtc_slab_opts_t opts = XTC_SLAB_OPTS_DEFAULT;
opts.name = "widgets";
opts.obj_size = sizeof(struct widget);
opts.flags = XTC_SLAB_REDZONE | XTC_SLAB_AUDIT;

xtc_slab_t *slab;
xtc_slab_create(&opts, &slab);

struct widget *w = xtc_slab_alloc(slab);
w->id = 42;
strcpy(w->name, "answer");

xtc_slab_free(slab, w);
xtc_slab_destroy(slab);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_mctx 3 ,
.Xr xtc_res 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Modeled on libumem.  Appeared in xtc 0.1.
