.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_SYNC 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_amutex ,
.Nm xtc_arwlock ,
.Nm xtc_rwlock ,
.Nm xtc_notify ,
.Nm xtc_sem ,
.Nm xtc_barrier ,
.Nm xtc_gate ,
.Nm xtc_abort_source
.Nd async synchronisation primitives
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_sync.h
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_sync
provides async-aware synchronisation primitives that integrate
with
.Xr xtc_loop 3
scheduling: blocked acquires park the calling fiber rather than
blocking the OS thread.
.Pp
.Bl -tag -width "abort_source" -offset indent
.It Vt xtc_amutex
Async mutex.  Blocked acquires park the fiber.  Use for critical
sections held across
.Xr xtc_recv 3
or other async I/O.  Compare with
.Xr xtc_lwlock 3
which uses pthread mutex underneath
.Pq blocks the OS thread .
.It Vt xtc_arwlock
Async reader-writer latch (shared / exclusive).  Blocked acquires park
the fiber, exactly as
.Vt xtc_amutex ,
so a holder may park on I/O while latched and lock coupling may hold a
parent latch across a child fix without wedging a cooperative loop.
FIFO fairness keeps a read stream from starving a waiting writer.
This is the reader-writer primitive a concurrent B-tree latches its
pages with.
.It Vt xtc_rwlock
Reader-writer lock with writer priority, built on a pthread mutex and
condition variable: a blocked acquire blocks the OS thread (it does
NOT park the fiber).  Use
.Vt xtc_arwlock
instead on the hot path of an event loop.
.It Vt xtc_notify
A 0-or-1 latch.  Producers
.Fn xtc_notify_signal ;
consumers
.Fn xtc_notify_wait
until signalled.  Useful for one-shot ready signals.
.It Vt xtc_sem
Counting semaphore.
.Fn xtc_sem_acquire / xtc_sem_release
on a per-instance counter.
.It Vt xtc_barrier
Synchronisation point: N participants
.Fn xtc_barrier_wait
until all have arrived; then all proceed.
.It Vt xtc_gate
A 0-or-1 latch with re-arm.  Like a notify but the barrier can be
closed and re-opened.
.It Vt xtc_abort_source
Cancellation token.  Initiator
.Fn xtc_abort
to signal cancellation; participants check
.Fn xtc_abort_check
periodically.  Used to wire timeout / shutdown into long-running
operations cooperatively.
.El
.Pp
All primitives are thread-safe.  All blocked-acquire paths park
the calling fiber via
.Xr xtc_proc_wait_fd 3
or directly into the loop's wait queue, so the OS thread is free
to run other work.
.Sh CHOOSING
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
For database-style transactional locking with deadlock detection:
.Xr xtc_lockmgr 3 .
.It
For short critical sections inside one xtc_loop:
.Xr xtc_lwlock 3 .
.It
For read-mostly state with wait-free readers:
.Xr xtc_lrlock 3
or
.Xr xtc_rcu 3 .
.It
For "wait until N producers have all signalled":
.Vt xtc_barrier
or
.Vt xtc_sem .
.It
For cancellation propagation:
.Vt xtc_abort_source .
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_lwlock 3 ,
.Xr xtc_lrlock 3 ,
.Xr xtc_lockmgr 3 ,
.Xr xtc_rcu 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Appeared in xtc 0.1.
