.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_LRLOCK 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_lrlock_create ,
.Nm xtc_lrlock_create_ex ,
.Nm xtc_lrlock_destroy ,
.Nm xtc_lrlock_read_begin ,
.Nm xtc_lrlock_read_end ,
.Nm xtc_lrlock_write_begin ,
.Nm xtc_lrlock_apply_op ,
.Nm xtc_lrlock_publish ,
.Nm xtc_lrlock_publish_full_sync ,
.Nm xtc_lrlock_write_end
.Nd left-right lock with wait-free reads
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_lrlock.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lrlock_create "size_t data_size" "xtc_lrlock_apply_fn apply_fn" "xtc_lrlock_sync_fn sync_fn" "const char *name" "xtc_lrlock_t **out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lrlock_create_ex "const xtc_lrlock_opts_t *opts" "xtc_lrlock_t **out"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_lrlock_destroy "xtc_lrlock_t *lr"
.Ft "const void *"
.Fn xtc_lrlock_read_begin "xtc_lrlock_t *lr"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_lrlock_read_end "xtc_lrlock_t *lr"
.Ft "void *"
.Fn xtc_lrlock_write_begin "xtc_lrlock_t *lr"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_lrlock_apply_op "xtc_lrlock_t *lr" "const void *op" "size_t op_size"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_lrlock_publish "xtc_lrlock_t *lr"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_lrlock_publish_full_sync "xtc_lrlock_t *lr"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_lrlock_write_end "xtc_lrlock_t *lr"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_lrlock
is a wait-free-read concurrency primitive that maintains two
copies of the protected state and atomically swaps which copy is
current on each writer publish.  Readers never block; writers
serialise.  Ported from the PostgreSQL lrlck branch.
.Pp
Two copies of the user data live side by side.  An atomic
.Vt read_idx
identifies which copy is currently the read copy.
.Pp
.Sy Reader path :
.Bl -enum -compact -offset indent
.It
Set this thread's bit in the active-readers bitmask.
.It
Bump this thread's epoch counter to odd.
.It
Sequentially-consistent fence.
.It
Atomic-acquire-load the current
.Vt read_idx .
.It
Read
.Vt data\^\& [ read_idx ] .
.It
Bump epoch back to even.  Clear bitmask bit.
.El
No CAS, no spin, no system call.
.Pp
.Sy Writer path :
.Bl -enum -compact -offset indent
.It
Take writer mutex
.Pq one writer at a time .
.It
Mutate the inactive copy via
.Fn xtc_lrlock_apply_op
or by writing to the buffer returned by
.Fn xtc_lrlock_write_begin .
.It
.Fn xtc_lrlock_publish :
swap
.Vt read_idx ,
fence, snapshot epoch counters, wait until each previously-active
reader has departed, then re-apply the operations to the now-stale
copy so both sides are in sync.
.It
.Fn xtc_lrlock_write_end
releases the writer mutex.
.El
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lrlock_create
opens a lock with default options
.Pq 64 reader slots, 4 KiB oplog .
.Fn xtc_lrlock_create_ex
takes
.Vt xtc_lrlock_opts_t
explicitly, exposing knobs for max readers, oplog capacity, and
flags
.Pq notably Dv XTC_LRLOCK_COW
which lazily allocates the second copy and
.Xr madvise 2 's
it back to the OS after each publish in COW mode .
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lrlock_apply_op
records a deterministic operation and applies it immediately to
the writer's copy.  On
.Fn xtc_lrlock_publish ,
the same op is replayed on the now-stale copy.  Operations must
be deterministic
.Pq same op + same starting state -> same end state .
For non-deterministic mutations, use
.Fn xtc_lrlock_publish_full_sync
which copies the entire data block instead of replaying ops.
.Sh CHOOSING vs. xtc_lwlock
Use
.Nm xtc_lrlock
when reads dominate (>50:1 R/W) and must never block.  Memory
cost is 2x the data size unless
.Dv XTC_LRLOCK_COW
is enabled.  See
.Xr xtc_lwlock 3
for short-critical-section reader/writer semantics with one copy.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
struct config { int max_clients; int log_level; };
struct op_set_max { int new_max; };

static void apply_set_max(void *data, const void *op, size_t sz) {
    ((struct config *)data)->max_clients =
        ((const struct op_set_max *)op)->new_max;
    (void)sz;
}
static void copy_config(void *dst, const void *src, size_t sz) {
    memcpy(dst, src, sz);
}

xtc_lrlock_t *cfg_lock;
xtc_lrlock_create(sizeof(struct config), apply_set_max, copy_config,
                  "config", &cfg_lock);

/* Reader -- wait-free. */
const struct config *c = xtc_lrlock_read_begin(cfg_lock);
int n = c->max_clients;
xtc_lrlock_read_end(cfg_lock);

/* Writer -- serialised. */
xtc_lrlock_write_begin(cfg_lock);
struct op_set_max op = { .new_max = 100 };
xtc_lrlock_apply_op(cfg_lock, &op, sizeof op);
xtc_lrlock_publish(cfg_lock);
xtc_lrlock_write_end(cfg_lock);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_lwlock 3 ,
.Xr xtc_lockmgr 3 ,
.Xr xtc_rcu 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Ported from PostgreSQL's lrlck branch.  Appeared in xtc 0.1.
.Sh SEE ALSO
Pedro Ramalhete and Andreia Correia,
.Sq Left-Right: A Concurrency Control Technique with Wait-Free
.Sq Population Oblivious Reads
.Pq 2014 .
