.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_RES 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_res_init ,
.Nm xtc_res_fini ,
.Nm xtc_res_acquire ,
.Nm xtc_res_release ,
.Nm xtc_res_used ,
.Nm xtc_res_cap ,
.Nm xtc_res_set_alert ,
.Nm xtc_res_set_alert_fn
.Nd resource accountant with hard caps and high-water alerts
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_res.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_res_init "xtc_res_t *res" "const xtc_res_caps_t *caps"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_res_fini "xtc_res_t *res"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_res_acquire "xtc_res_t *res" "xtc_res_kind_t kind" "int64_t amount"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_res_release "xtc_res_t *res" "xtc_res_kind_t kind" "int64_t amount"
.Ft int64_t
.Fn xtc_res_used "const xtc_res_t *res" "xtc_res_kind_t kind"
.Ft int64_t
.Fn xtc_res_cap "const xtc_res_t *res" "xtc_res_kind_t kind"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_res_set_alert "xtc_res_t *res" "xtc_res_kind_t kind" "int64_t threshold"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_res_set_alert_fn "xtc_res_t *res" "xtc_res_alert_fn fn" "void *user"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_res
tracks resource consumption against operator-configured hard caps.
Tracked kinds:
.Bl -tag -width "XTC_RES_MEM_BYTES" -compact -offset indent
.It Dv XTC_RES_MEM_BYTES
Bytes of allocated memory.
.It Dv XTC_RES_TASKS
In-flight tasks
.Pq xtc_proc + xtc_task .
.It Dv XTC_RES_FDS
Open file descriptors.
.It Dv XTC_RES_NET_BYTES
Network throughput
.Pq for rate limiting .
.It Dv XTC_RES_DISK_BYTES
Disk I/O byte count.
.It Dv XTC_RES_INFLIGHT_INBOX_MSGS
Cross-loop inbox queue length.
.El
.Pp
Each kind has an optional cap.
.Fn xtc_res_acquire
returns
.Dv XTC_E_RESOURCE
if the request would exceed the cap;
.Fn xtc_res_release
gives capacity back.  Both are atomic; thread-safe under
concurrent calls.
.Pp
.Sy Alert callbacks :
when usage crosses
.Fa threshold
upward, the alert fn fires.  When usage drops back below the
threshold, the alert re-arms.  This avoids alert floods while
ensuring each crossing fires.
.Pp
This is the centerpiece of xtc's
.Sq predictable behaviour under stress
discipline: every resource that grows under load
.Po memory, FDs, in-flight requests Pc
must be charged to a res accountant so the cap holds.
.Sh EXAMPLES
.Bd -literal -offset indent
xtc_res_t res;
xtc_res_caps_t caps = XTC_RES_CAPS_DEFAULT;
caps.mem_bytes = 100 * 1024 * 1024;       /* 100 MiB */
caps.tasks     = 10000;
caps.fds       = 4096;

xtc_res_init(&res, &caps);

/* Charge memory before allocating. */
if (xtc_res_acquire(&res, XTC_RES_MEM_BYTES, sz) != XTC_OK)
    return XTC_E_RESOURCE;
ptr = malloc(sz);
if (!ptr) {
    xtc_res_release(&res, XTC_RES_MEM_BYTES, sz);
    return XTC_E_NOMEM;
}

/* When done: */
free(ptr);
xtc_res_release(&res, XTC_RES_MEM_BYTES, sz);
.Ed
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_slab 3 ,
.Xr xtc_log 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Appeared in xtc 0.1.
