.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_RCU 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_rcu_init ,
.Nm xtc_rcu_fini ,
.Nm xtc_rcu_read_lock ,
.Nm xtc_rcu_read_unlock ,
.Nm xtc_rcu_retire ,
.Nm xtc_rcu_synchronize
.Nd epoch-based read-copy-update
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_rcu.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_rcu_init "void"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_rcu_fini "void"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_rcu_read_lock "void"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_rcu_read_unlock "void"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_rcu_retire "void *p" "xtc_rcu_free_fn fn"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_rcu_synchronize "void"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_rcu
is an epoch-based read-copy-update primitive for read-mostly data
structures with deferred reclamation.  Readers operate
.Em wait-free
inside critical sections delimited by
.Fn xtc_rcu_read_lock
and
.Fn xtc_rcu_read_unlock .
Writers atomically swap pointers to new state and call
.Fn xtc_rcu_retire
to free the old state once all readers that may have observed it
have exited their critical sections.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_rcu_synchronize
blocks until all currently-active readers have exited.  Used by
writers that want to free old state synchronously rather than via
the deferred-retire path.
.Pp
The implementation tracks per-thread epoch counters in a
TLS-registered linked list.  Retired records bucket by epoch;
records two epochs old are guaranteed safe to free.
.Sh CHOOSING vs. xtc_lrlock
Both give wait-free reads.  Trade-offs:
.Bl -tag -width "xtc_lrlock" -offset indent
.It Vt xtc_rcu
Pointer-swap; arbitrary structure shape; deferred reclamation.
Best when the structure is small or rare-write.
.It Vt xtc_lrlock
Two-copy + replay; suits structures where the data is updated in
place
.Pq buffer pools, page caches .
Memory is 2x; reclamation is immediate via the publish-drain.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_lrlock 3 ,
.Xr xtc_lwlock 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Appeared in xtc 0.1.
