.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_SUPERVISOR 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_sup_start ,
.Nm xtc_sup_stop ,
.Nm xtc_sup_join ,
.Nm xtc_sup_alive ,
.Nm xtc_sup_n_children ,
.Nm xtc_sup_n_restarts
.Nd OTP-style supervisor trees
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_orc.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_sup_start "xtc_loop_t *loop" "const xtc_sup_opts_t *opts" "const xtc_child_spec_t *children" "int n_children" "xtc_supervisor_t **out_sup"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_sup_stop "xtc_supervisor_t *sup"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_sup_join "xtc_supervisor_t *sup" "int64_t timeout_ns"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_sup_alive "const xtc_supervisor_t *sup"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_sup_n_children "const xtc_supervisor_t *sup"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_sup_n_restarts "const xtc_supervisor_t *sup"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_supervisor
is an OTP-style supervisor: it owns a set of child specs, spawns
them, observes failures, and restarts them per the configured
strategy.  Failures isolate to children; the supervisor's own
liveness is independent of any single child.
.Pp
.Sy Strategies
control which children get restarted on a child crash:
.Bl -tag -width "simple_one_for_one" -offset indent
.It Dv XTC_SUP_ONE_FOR_ONE
Only the crashed child restarts.
.It Dv XTC_SUP_ONE_FOR_ALL
All children restart.
.It Dv XTC_SUP_REST_FOR_ONE
The crashed child and all started after it
.Pq right siblings
restart, in order.
.It Dv XTC_SUP_SIMPLE_ONE_FOR_ONE
Children spawned dynamically; not all known up front.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Restart policies
per child:
.Bl -tag -width "XTC_RESTART_TRANSIENT" -offset indent
.It Dv XTC_RESTART_PERMANENT
Always restart on exit
.Pq normal or crash .
.It Dv XTC_RESTART_TRANSIENT
Restart on abnormal exit only.
.It Dv XTC_RESTART_TEMPORARY
Never restart; one-shot.
.El
.Pp
.Sy Restart intensity:
.Va opts.max_restarts
restarts within
.Va opts.period_ns
exhausts the supervisor; it gives up and exits.  Default:
1 in 5 seconds.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_sup_start
spawns the supervisor and its initial children.  Returns
.Dv XTC_OK
with
.Fa *out_sup
set, or
.Dv XTC_E_INVAL
on bad args
.Pq notably Fa n_children Em <= 0 ;
empty supervisors not supported, see
.Pa examples/06_sqlxtc/main.c
for a one-listener-child workaround .
.Pp
.Fn xtc_sup_stop
asynchronously requests shutdown.  Children get
.Sq EXIT
signals; the supervisor exits when all are done.
.Fn xtc_sup_join
waits up to
.Fa timeout_ns
for the supervisor to exit.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_app 3 ,
.Xr xtc_proc 3 ,
.Xr xtc_svr 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Appeared in xtc 0.1.
