.Dd May 31, 2026
.Dt XTC_ALLOC_AUDIT 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_alloc_audit_enable ,
.Nm xtc_alloc_audit_stats ,
.Nm xtc_alloc_audit_proc_leaks
.Nd debug allocation auditor with per-process leak detection
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_alloc_audit.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_alloc_audit_enable "int on"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_alloc_audit_stats "size_t *out_count" "size_t *out_bytes"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_alloc_audit_proc_leaks "xtc_pid_t pid" "size_t *out_count" "size_t *out_bytes"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
The allocation auditor records every live allocation together with the
process
.Pq Fn xtc_self
that made it, so a test can assert a process freed everything it
allocated before it died.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_alloc_audit_enable
with a non-zero argument wraps the current allocator hook
.Pq Xr __os_alloc 3 :
each allocation calls the previous (downstream) allocator and is
recorded in a hash table keyed by pointer; each free or realloc
removes or re-keys the record.  The table's own nodes are allocated
through the downstream hook directly, so the auditor never audits
itself.  A zero argument restores the previous hook and frees the
table.  It returns
.Dv XTC_OK ,
or
.Dv XTC_E_NOMEM
if the table could not be allocated.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_alloc_audit_stats
reports the total number of live (unfreed) allocations and their byte
sum across all owners.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_alloc_audit_proc_leaks
reports the live allocations still attributed to
.Fa pid
.Pq allocations made off a process are attributed to the none pid .
This is the per-process leak check: call it from the process's
.Xr xtc_proc_at_exit 3
hook, or after the process is reaped, to confirm it leaked nothing.
.Sh RETURN VALUES
.Fn xtc_alloc_audit_enable
returns
.Dv XTC_OK
on success or
.Dv XTC_E_NOMEM .
The query functions write through their non-NULL output pointers.
.Sh PERFORMANCE
The auditor serializes every allocation and free on a global mutex,
so it is a debug and test tool, not for production hot paths.  It is
off by default.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr __os_alloc 3 ,
.Xr xtc_proc 3
.Sh AUTHORS
The
.Nm xtc
project.
