.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 28, 2026
.Dt XTC_LOCKMGR 3
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc_lockmgr_create ,
.Nm xtc_lockmgr_destroy ,
.Nm xtc_lockmgr_id ,
.Nm xtc_lockmgr_id_free ,
.Nm xtc_lock_get ,
.Nm xtc_lock_put ,
.Nm xtc_lock_vec ,
.Nm xtc_lockmgr_check_deadlocks ,
.Nm xtc_lockmgr_stat ,
.Nm xtc_lockmgr_failchk
.Nd transactional lock manager with deadlock detection
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.In xtc.h
.In xtc_lockmgr.h
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lockmgr_create "const xtc_lockmgr_opts_t *opts" "xtc_lockmgr_t **out"
.Ft void
.Fn xtc_lockmgr_destroy "xtc_lockmgr_t *m"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lockmgr_id "xtc_lockmgr_t *m" "xtc_locker_t *out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lockmgr_id_free "xtc_lockmgr_t *m" "xtc_locker_t locker"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lock_get "xtc_lockmgr_t *m" "xtc_locker_t locker" "const void *key" "size_t key_size" "xtc_lock_mode_t mode" "int64_t timeout_ns"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lock_put "xtc_lockmgr_t *m" "xtc_locker_t locker" "const void *key" "size_t key_size"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lock_vec "xtc_lockmgr_t *m" "xtc_locker_t locker" "const xtc_lock_req_t *reqs" "int n_reqs" "int64_t timeout_ns"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lockmgr_check_deadlocks "xtc_lockmgr_t *m" "int *n_aborted"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lockmgr_stat "xtc_lockmgr_t *m" "xtc_lockmgr_stat_t *out"
.Ft int
.Fn xtc_lockmgr_failchk "xtc_lockmgr_t *m"
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm xtc_lockmgr
is a transactional lock manager modeled on Berkeley DB's
.Pa lock_*.c
subsystem.  It provides:
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
Named lockable objects identified by arbitrary
.Pq Fa key , key_size
byte strings.
.It
Nine lock modes via the BDB
.Sq read-intent-write
matrix
(XTC_LOCK_NL, XTC_LOCK_S, XTC_LOCK_X, XTC_LOCK_WAIT,
XTC_LOCK_IS, XTC_LOCK_IX, XTC_LOCK_IWR, XTC_LOCK_RU, XTC_LOCK_WW),
or a caller-supplied conflict matrix.
.It
Deadlock detection in two flavours:
.Dv XTC_LOCK_DETECT_PERIODIC
runs a background thread; the
.Dv XTC_LOCK_DETECT_ON_BLOCK
mode runs synchronously every time a
requestor would block.
.It
Eight victim policies
(XTC_LOCK_VICTIM_RANDOM, OLDEST, YOUNGEST, MIN_LOCKS,
MAX_LOCKS, MIN_WRITE, MAX_WRITE, EXPIRE)
plus
.Dv XTC_LOCK_VICTIM_CUSTOM
which delegates to a caller-supplied callback.
.It
Compound atomic acquires via
.Fn xtc_lock_vec
.Po N requests succeed-or-rollback Pc .
.It
Per-locker timeouts and statistics.
.El
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lockmgr_create
opens a lock manager with the given options.  Options control
partition count
.Pq for hash sharding ,
detector mode and interval, victim policy, and the conflict
matrix.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lockmgr_id
allocates a locker handle (think transaction id).  Hold one per
in-flight transaction; passing it to
.Fn xtc_lock_get
identifies which transaction is asking.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lock_get
acquires
.Fa mode
on the named object.  Returns:
.Bl -tag -width "XTC_E_DEADLK" -offset indent
.It Dv XTC_OK
The lock is held by
.Fa locker .
.It Dv XTC_E_AGAIN
The
.Fa timeout_ns
elapsed without acquiring.
.It Dv XTC_E_DEADLK
The deadlock detector chose
.Fa locker
as a victim; the call rolls back any partial state.
.It Dv XTC_E_INVAL
Bad arguments or unknown
.Fa locker .
.El
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lock_put
releases the named lock.  Order of release does not matter; the
lockmgr tracks per-locker held lists.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lock_vec
performs an atomic compound acquire.  Either all requested
locks are granted, or none are
.Pq if any single grant would block or be rejected ;
no partial state is left.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lockmgr_check_deadlocks
runs the cycle-detection algorithm synchronously and aborts any
victims it finds.  Useful in
.Dv XTC_LOCK_DETECT_NONE
mode where the caller drives detection.
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lockmgr_stat
fills
.Fa out
with current counts: held, waiting, total acquires, total
releases, deadlocks found, victims aborted, etc.  No locks held
during the snapshot
.Pq counters are atomic .
.Pp
.Fn xtc_lockmgr_failchk
sweeps for crashed lockers
.Pq those whose owning thread has exited without releasing
and reclaims their locks.
.Sh CHOOSING vs. xtc_lwlock / xtc_lrlock
Use
.Nm xtc_lockmgr
when:
.Bl -bullet -compact -offset indent
.It
Locks are named by user-supplied keys
.Po e.g. table name, page id Pc
rather than living in a fixed location.
.It
You need multiple lock modes beyond shared / exclusive
.Pq intent locks for hierarchical locking .
.It
You want deadlock detection out of the box.
.It
Compound acquires must be atomic.
.El
For everything else, prefer
.Xr xtc_lwlock 3
or
.Xr xtc_lrlock 3 .
.Sh CUSTOM VICTIM PICKER
Setting
.Va opts.victim
to
.Dv XTC_LOCK_VICTIM_CUSTOM
and providing
.Va opts.victim_pick_fn
delegates the choice to user code:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
typedef int (*xtc_lock_victim_pick_fn)(
    const uint64_t *candidate_lockers, int n_candidates,
    void *user);
.Ed
.Pp
The callback receives the locker IDs in the cycle and returns an
index in
.Bq 0 , n_candidates .
See
.Pa examples/04_lockmgr_demo.c
for a deck-shuffled randomised picker.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_lwlock 3 ,
.Xr xtc_lrlock 3 ,
.Xr xtc 7
.Sh HISTORY
Modeled on Berkeley DB's
.Pa lock_*.c
subsystem.  Appeared in xtc 0.1.
