.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project — All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the ISC License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt XTC-ABI-STABILITY 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc-abi-stability
.Nd ABI stability and deprecation policy for xtc
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is the operational summary of the xtc longevity contract.
The full discussion is in
.Pa PLAN.md
section 18; the user-facing reference is
.Pa docs/abi-stability.md .
.Sh VERSIONING
xtc uses
.Lk https://semver.org SemVer 2.0
with an explicit ABI promise:
.Bl -tag -width "MINOR"
.It Sy PATCH
Bug fixes only.
Same ABI, on-disk format, wire format, tracing-span shape.
.It Sy MINOR
Additive changes only.
No symbol removed or renamed; no enum renumbered; no behaviour
change for code compiled against the prior minor.
.It Sy MAJOR
Breaking changes allowed.
Cadence is intentionally slow
.Pq three to five years .
The previous major receives at least 18 months of LTS.
.El
.Sh SYMBOL VERSIONING
ABI stability is enforced mechanically by
.Pa dist/s_abi
on every release tag.
.Bl -tag -width Ds -compact
.It Linux glibc, Solaris, FreeBSD: Em .symver No directives.
.It Windows: stable ordinals + Pa xtc.def .
.It macOS: matched -current_version / -compatibility_version.
.El
.Sh CAPABILITY BITS
Applications query capabilities, not version numbers:
.Bd -literal -offset indent
if (xtc_have_capability("io_uring")) { ... }
.Ed
.Pp
Capabilities are declared in
.Pa dist/capabilities.in .
Adding one is a minor bump; removing one is a major bump.
.Sh DEPRECATION LIFECYCLE
Removal of any public API takes a minimum of five minor releases:
.Bl -enum -compact
.It
Live.
.It
Soft-deprecated
.Pq compiler note .
.It
Deprecated
.Pq compiler warning + runtime log .
.It
Default-off
.Pq build error without Sy XTC_ENABLE_DEPRECATED .
.It
Removed
.Pq Sy #error No in header .
.El
.Sh COMPAT TEST SUITE
.Pa test/compat/
contains the worked examples from every prior 1.x release built
against the current source.
They must continue to compile and pass.
.Sh TRACE-SHAPE STABILITY
Span names are stable across minors.
Renaming or removing attributes is a major change.
.Pa test/trace_compat/
diffs current span shape against the most recent release.
.Sh ON-DISK FORMATS
The flight-recorder dump, crash trace, stat snapshot, and admin
socket protocol each carry a format-version byte.
.Xr xtcdump 1
reads every version we have ever shipped, forever.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc 7 ,
.Xr xtc-build 7
.Pp
.Pa docs/abi-stability.md ,
.Pa PLAN.md
section 18.
