.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project — All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the PostgreSQL License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt XTC-BUILD 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc-build
.Nd how to build the xtc library and run its tests
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
.Pq xtc
ships two parallel build systems driven from a single source of
truth.
The autoconf path is the primary CI gate; the meson path is a
co-equal alternative for developers who prefer it.
.Pp
Both paths enforce out-of-source builds.
Configuring inside the source root or inside
.Pa dist/
is rejected with a clear error message.
.Sh AUTOCONF PATH
.Bd -literal -offset indent
cd dist && autoreconf -i && cd ..
mkdir -p build_unix && cd build_unix
\&../dist/configure
make
make check
.Ed
.Pp
.Cm make check
runs every test in the current milestone's claims file.
See
.Pa M0_CLAIMS.md
.Pq or its successor
for the full matrix.
.Sh MESON PATH
.Bd -literal -offset indent
meson setup build_meson
meson compile -C build_meson
meson test    -C build_meson
.Ed
.Sh REPRODUCIBLE TOOLCHAIN
.Bd -literal -offset indent
nix develop
.Ed
.Pp
The Nix flake provisions autoconf, meson, ninja, GCC, clang, mandoc,
shellcheck, valgrind, and the full sanitizer toolchain.
.Sh DIST GENERATORS
.Pa dist/s_*
scripts produce derived files
.Pq prototype headers, build files, lints .
The full set is run by
.Pa dist/s_all .
Each generator's responsibilities are documented in
.Pa PLAN.md
.Sx 6.4
and asserted by tests under
.Pa test/dist/ .
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Ev XTC_BUILD_DIR
Set by the test harness to the absolute path of the active build
directory.
.It Ev XTC_SRC_DIR
Set by the test harness to the absolute path of the source root.
.El
.Sh FILES
.Bl -tag -width Ds
.It Pa dist/configure.ac
Autoconf source.
Run
.Cm autoreconf -i
in
.Pa dist/
to produce
.Pa configure .
.It Pa dist/meson.build
Meson build entry point.
.It Pa dist/Makefile.in
Template for the autoconf-generated Makefile.
.It Pa dist/version.in
Single source of truth for the SemVer version.
.El
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc 7 ,
.Xr xtc-abi-stability 7
.Sh HISTORY
First appeared in xtc 0.0.1.
