.\" Copyright (c) 2026, The XTC Project — All rights reserved.
.\" Use of this source code is governed by the PostgreSQL License.
.Dd May 25, 2026
.Dt XTC 7
.Os
.Sh NAME
.Nm xtc
.Nd high-performance asynchronous concurrency runtime for C
.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is a layered C library that provides Tokio-style async tasks,
BEAM-style processes / mailboxes / supervisors, and Seastar-style
per-CPU shared-nothing reactors over a pluggable I/O substrate
.Pq io_uring, epoll, kqueue, IOCP, poll .
.Pp
The eventual consumer is a threaded PostgreSQL.
The library is also useful standalone for greenfield C servers that
want predictable p99 latency on shared-nothing thread pools.
.Sh ARCHITECTURE
.Nm
is organised in six layers, lowest first:
.Bl -tag -width "L4 orc/" -compact
.It L0 Pa os/
Portable
.Sy __os_*
abstractions over the operating system: threads, processes, shared
memory, atomics, time, file ops, signals, locale, etc.
.It L1 Pa io/
Pollable I/O abstraction.
Exactly one backend is compiled in at configure time.
.It L2 Pa evt/
Event loop and scheduler: per-thread reactor, work-stealing deque,
hierarchical timer wheel, fiber and Duff's-device coroutine substrates.
.It L3 Pa ptc/
Processes, threads, channels.
Mailboxes with selective receive, links, monitors, channels of every
kind, futures, sync primitives including RCU and the lock manager,
the
.Sy dispatch / reply
sugar, and the
.Sy async / await
macros.
Also: observability, the blocking-call contract, the hooks framework,
configuration and logging.
.It L4 Pa orc/
Orchestration: supervisors,
.Sy xtc_svr
.Pq the gen_server analogue ,
.Sy xtc_fsm ,
.Sy xtc_app ,
.Sy xtc_reg .
.It L5 Pa pg/
PostgreSQL adapter.
Optional; built only when configured with PG support.
.El
.Pp
Lower layers know nothing of upper layers.
Each layer has its own internal header, its own subdirectory under
.Pa src/ ,
and its own test binary.
.Sh DESIGN PRINCIPLES
.Bl -bullet -compact
.It
Shared-nothing reactors by default.
.It
Configure-time backend selection.
No vtable on the hot path.
.It
C11 dialect, matching PostgreSQL 18+.
.It
BDB / DBSQL conventions for naming, file layout, and build apparatus.
.It
Test-first claim-driven development:
every claim in code or documentation has a test.
.It
Mechanical change as doctrine: structural changes go through
.Pa dist/s_*
generators rather than by hand.
.It
SemVer with explicit ABI promise; capability bits not version checks.
See
.Xr xtc-abi-stability 7 .
.El
.Sh BUILDING
.Nm
ships two parallel build systems with a common single-source-of-truth.
See
.Pa README.md
or
.Xr xtc-build 7
for the up-to-date instructions.
.Sh SEE ALSO
.Xr xtc_version_string 3 ,
.Xr xtc_version_components 3 ,
.Xr xtc_strerror 3
.Pp
Long-form documentation:
.Pa PLAN.md ,
.Pa docs/ARCHITECTURE.md ,
.Pa docs/abi-stability.md .
.Sh STANDARDS
.Nm
requires a C11 conforming compiler and adheres to
.Lk https://semver.org SemVer 2.0
for versioning.
.Sh HISTORY
The xtc project began in 2026 as the runtime substrate for a
threaded PostgreSQL.
.Sh AUTHORS
The xtc project.
See
.Pa AUTHORS
in the source distribution.
